**Artificial intelligence** (**AI**), in its broadest sense, is
[intelligence](intelligence "wikilink") exhibited by
[machines](machine "wikilink"), particularly [computer
systems](computer_systems "wikilink"). It is a [field of
research](field_of_research "wikilink") in [computer
science](computer_science "wikilink") that develops and studies methods
and [software](software "wikilink") that enable machines to [perceive
their environment](Machine_perception "wikilink") and uses
[learning](machine_learning "wikilink") and intelligence to take actions
that maximize their chances of achieving defined goals. Such machines
may be called AIs.

[AI technology](Applications_of_artificial_intelligence "wikilink") is
widely used [throughout
industry](Artificial_intelligence_in_industry "wikilink"),
[government](Artificial_intelligence_in_government "wikilink"), and
[science](science "wikilink"). Some high-profile applications include
advanced [web search engines](web_search_engine "wikilink") (e.g.,
[Google Search](Google_Search "wikilink")); [recommendation
systems](recommender_system "wikilink") (used by
[YouTube](YouTube "wikilink"), [Amazon](Amazon_(company) "wikilink"),
and [Netflix](Netflix "wikilink")); interacting [via human
speech](natural-language_understanding "wikilink") (e.g., [Google
Assistant](Google_Assistant "wikilink"), [Siri](Siri "wikilink"), and
[Alexa](Amazon_Alexa "wikilink")); [autonomous
vehicles](autonomous_vehicles "wikilink") (e.g.,
[Waymo](Waymo "wikilink"));
[generative](Generative_artificial_intelligence "wikilink") and
[creative](Computational_creativity "wikilink") tools (e.g.,
[ChatGPT](ChatGPT "wikilink") and [AI art](AI_art "wikilink")); and
[superhuman](Superintelligence "wikilink") play and analysis in
[strategy games](strategy_game "wikilink") (e.g.,
[chess](chess "wikilink") and [Go](Go_(game) "wikilink")). However, many
AI applications are not perceived as AI: "A lot of cutting edge AI has
filtered into general applications, often without being called AI
because once something becomes useful enough and common enough it's [not
labeled AI anymore](AI_effect "wikilink")."[1][2]

[Alan Turing](Alan_Turing "wikilink") was the first person to conduct
substantial research in the field that he called machine
intelligence.[3] Artificial intelligence was founded as an academic
discipline in 1956.[4] The field went through multiple cycles of
optimism,[5][6] followed by periods of disappointment and loss of
funding, known as [AI winter](AI_winter "wikilink").[7][8] Funding and
interest vastly increased after 2012 when [deep
learning](deep_learning "wikilink") surpassed all previous AI
techniques,[9] and after 2017 with the [transformer
architecture](Transformer_(machine_learning_model) "wikilink"). This led
to the [AI boom](AI_boom "wikilink") of the early 2020s, with companies,
universities, and laboratories overwhelmingly based in the United States
pioneering significant [advances in artificial
intelligence](advances_in_artificial_intelligence "wikilink").

The growing use of artificial intelligence in the 21st century is
influencing [a societal and economic shift](AI_era "wikilink") towards
increased [automation](automation "wikilink"), [data-driven
decision-making](data-driven_decision-making "wikilink"), and the
[integration of AI
systems](Artificial_intelligence_systems_integration "wikilink") into
various economic sectors and areas of life, [impacting job
markets](Workplace_impact_of_artificial_intelligence "wikilink"),
[healthcare](Artificial_intelligence_in_healthcare "wikilink"),
government, industry,
[education](Artificial_intelligence_in_education "wikilink"),
[propaganda](propaganda "wikilink"), and
[disinformation](disinformation "wikilink"). This raises questions about
[the long-term effects](AI_aftermath_scenarios "wikilink"), [ethical
implications](Ethics_of_artificial_intelligence "wikilink"), and [risks
of AI](AI_risk "wikilink"), prompting discussions about [regulatory
policies](Regulation_of_artificial_intelligence "wikilink") to ensure
the [safety and benefits of the technology](AI_safety "wikilink").

The various subfields of AI research are centered around particular
goals and the use of particular tools. The traditional goals of AI
research include [reasoning](automated_reasoning "wikilink"), [knowledge
representation](knowledge_representation "wikilink"),
[planning](Automated_planning_and_scheduling "wikilink"),
[learning](machine_learning "wikilink"), [natural language
processing](natural_language_processing "wikilink"), perception, and
support for [robotics](robotics "wikilink"). [General
intelligence](Artificial_general_intelligence "wikilink")—the ability to
complete any task performable by a human on an at least equal level—is
among the field's long-term goals.[10]

To reach these goals, AI researchers have adapted and integrated a wide
range of techniques, including [search](state_space_search "wikilink")
and [mathematical optimization](mathematical_optimization "wikilink"),
[formal logic](Logic#Formal_logic "wikilink"), [artificial neural
networks](artificial_neural_network "wikilink"), and methods based on
[statistics](statistics "wikilink"), [operations
research](operations_research "wikilink"), and
[economics](economics "wikilink"). AI also draws upon
[psychology](psychology "wikilink"),
[linguistics](linguistics "wikilink"),
[philosophy](Philosophy_of_artificial_intelligence "wikilink"),
[neuroscience](neuroscience "wikilink"), and other fields.[11]

## Goals

The general problem of simulating (or creating) intelligence has been
broken into subproblems. These consist of particular traits or
capabilities that researchers expect an intelligent system to display.
The traits described below have received the most attention and cover
the scope of AI research.

### Reasoning and problem-solving

Early researchers developed algorithms that imitated step-by-step
reasoning that humans use when they solve puzzles or make logical
[deductions](Deductive_reasoning "wikilink").[12] By the late 1980s and
1990s, methods were developed for dealing with
[uncertain](uncertainty "wikilink") or incomplete information, employing
concepts from [probability](probability "wikilink") and
[economics](economics "wikilink").[13]

Many of these algorithms are insufficient for solving large reasoning
problems because they experience a "combinatorial explosion": They
become exponentially slower as the problems grow.[14] Even humans rarely
use the step-by-step deduction that early AI research could model. They
solve most of their problems using fast, intuitive judgments.[15]
Accurate and efficient reasoning is an unsolved problem.

### Knowledge representation

[thumb|upright=1.2|An ontology represents knowledge as a set of concepts
within a domain and the relationships between those
concepts.](File:General_Formal_Ontology.svg "wikilink")

[Knowledge representation](Knowledge_representation "wikilink") and
[knowledge engineering](knowledge_engineering "wikilink")[16] allow AI
programs to answer questions intelligently and make deductions about
real-world facts. Formal knowledge representations are used in
content-based indexing and retrieval, scene interpretation, clinical
decision support, knowledge discovery (mining "interesting" and
actionable inferences from large [databases](database "wikilink")), and
other areas.

A [knowledge base](knowledge_base "wikilink") is a body of knowledge
represented in a form that can be used by a program. An
[ontology](ontology_(information_science) "wikilink") is the set of
objects, relations, concepts, and properties used by a particular domain
of knowledge. Knowledge bases need to represent things such as objects,
properties, categories, and relations between objects;[17] situations,
events, states, and time;[18] causes and effects;[19] knowledge about
knowledge (what we know about what other people know);[20] [default
reasoning](default_reasoning "wikilink") (things that humans assume are
true until they are told differently and will remain true even when
other facts are changing);[21] and many other aspects and domains of
knowledge.

Among the most difficult problems in knowledge representation are the
breadth of commonsense knowledge (the set of atomic facts that the
average person knows is enormous);[22] and the sub-symbolic form of most
commonsense knowledge (much of what people know is not represented as
"facts" or "statements" that they could express verbally).[23] There is
also the difficulty of [knowledge
acquisition](knowledge_acquisition "wikilink"), the problem of obtaining
knowledge for AI applications.

### Planning and decision-making

An "agent" is anything that perceives and takes actions in the world. A
[rational agent](rational_agent "wikilink") has goals or preferences and
takes actions to make them happen. In [automated
planning](automated_planning_and_scheduling "wikilink"), the agent has a
specific goal.[24] In [automated
decision-making](automated_decision-making "wikilink"), the agent has
preferences—there are some situations it would prefer to be in, and some
situations it is trying to avoid. The decision-making agent assigns a
number to each situation (called the
"[utility](utility_(economics) "wikilink")") that measures how much the
agent prefers it. For each possible action, it can calculate the
"[expected utility](expected_utility "wikilink")": the
[utility](utility "wikilink") of all possible outcomes of the action,
weighted by the probability that the outcome will occur. It can then
choose the action with the maximum expected utility.[25]

In [classical
planning](Automated_planning_and_scheduling#classical_planning "wikilink"),
the agent knows exactly what the effect of any action will be.[26] In
most real-world problems, however, the agent may not be certain about
the situation they are in (it is "unknown" or "unobservable") and it may
not know for certain what will happen after each possible action (it is
not "deterministic"). It must choose an action by making a probabilistic
guess and then reassess the situation to see if the action worked.[27]

In some problems, the agent's preferences may be uncertain, especially
if there are other agents or humans involved. These can be learned
(e.g., with [inverse reinforcement
learning](inverse_reinforcement_learning "wikilink")), or the agent can
seek information to improve its preferences.[28] [Information value
theory](Information_value_theory "wikilink") can be used to weigh the
value of exploratory or experimental actions.[29] The space of possible
future actions and situations is typically
[intractably](intractable_problem "wikilink") large, so the agents must
take actions and evaluate situations while being uncertain of what the
outcome will be.

A [Markov decision process](Markov_decision_process "wikilink") has a
[transition model](Finite-state_machine "wikilink") that describes the
probability that a particular action will change the state in a
particular way and a [reward function](reward_function "wikilink") that
supplies the utility of each state and the cost of each action. A
[policy](Reinforcement_learning#Policy "wikilink") associates a decision
with each possible state. The policy could be calculated (e.g., by
[iteration](policy_iteration "wikilink")), be
[heuristic](heuristic "wikilink"), or it can be learned.[30]

[Game theory](Game_theory "wikilink") describes the rational behavior of
multiple interacting agents and is used in AI programs that make
decisions that involve other agents.[31]

### Learning

[Machine learning](Machine_learning "wikilink") is the study of programs
that can improve their performance on a given task automatically.[32] It
has been a part of AI from the beginning.

There are several kinds of machine learning. [Unsupervised
learning](Unsupervised_learning "wikilink") analyzes a stream of data
and finds patterns and makes predictions without any other guidance.[33]
[Supervised learning](Supervised_learning "wikilink") requires a human
to label the input data first, and comes in two main varieties:
[classification](statistical_classification "wikilink") (where the
program must learn to predict what category the input belongs in) and
[regression](Regression_analysis "wikilink") (where the program must
deduce a numeric function based on numeric input).[34]

In [reinforcement learning](reinforcement_learning "wikilink"), the
agent is rewarded for good responses and punished for bad ones. The
agent learns to choose responses that are classified as "good".[35]
[Transfer learning](Transfer_learning "wikilink") is when the knowledge
gained from one problem is applied to a new problem.[36] [Deep
learning](Deep_learning "wikilink") is a type of machine learning that
runs inputs through biologically inspired [artificial neural
networks](artificial_neural_networks "wikilink") for all of these types
of learning.[37]

[Computational learning
theory](Computational_learning_theory "wikilink") can assess learners by
[computational complexity](computational_complexity "wikilink"), by
[sample complexity](sample_complexity "wikilink") (how much data is
required), or by other notions of
[optimization](optimization_theory "wikilink").[38]

### Natural language processing

[Natural language processing](Natural_language_processing "wikilink")
(NLP)[39] allows programs to read, write and communicate in human
languages such as [English](English_(language) "wikilink"). Specific
problems include [speech recognition](speech_recognition "wikilink"),
[speech synthesis](speech_synthesis "wikilink"), [machine
translation](machine_translation "wikilink"), [information
extraction](information_extraction "wikilink"), [information
retrieval](information_retrieval "wikilink") and [question
answering](question_answering "wikilink").[40]

Early work, based on [Noam Chomsky](Noam_Chomsky "wikilink")'s
[generative grammar](generative_grammar "wikilink") and [semantic
networks](semantic_network "wikilink"), had difficulty with [word-sense
disambiguation](word-sense_disambiguation "wikilink") unless restricted
to small domains called "[micro-worlds](blocks_world "wikilink")" (due
to the common sense knowledge problem[41]). [Margaret
Masterman](Margaret_Masterman "wikilink") believed that it was meaning
and not grammar that was the key to understanding languages, and that
[thesauri](thesauri "wikilink") and not dictionaries should be the basis
of computational language structure.

Modern deep learning techniques for NLP include [word
embedding](word_embedding "wikilink") (representing words, typically as
[vectors](Vector_space "wikilink") encoding their meaning),
[transformers](transformer_(machine_learning_model) "wikilink") (a deep
learning architecture using an
[attention](Attention_(machine_learning) "wikilink") mechanism), and
others.[42] In 2019, [generative pre-trained
transformer](generative_pre-trained_transformer "wikilink") (or "GPT")
language models began to generate coherent text, and by 2023 these
models were able to get human-level scores on the [bar
exam](bar_exam "wikilink"), [SAT](scholastic_aptitude_test "wikilink")
test, [GRE](Graduate_Record_Examinations "wikilink") test, and many
other real-world applications.

### Perception

[Machine perception](Machine_perception "wikilink") is the ability to
use input from sensors (such as cameras, microphones, wireless signals,
active [lidar](lidar "wikilink"), sonar, radar, and [tactile
sensors](tactile_sensor "wikilink")) to deduce aspects of the world.
[Computer vision](Computer_vision "wikilink") is the ability to analyze
visual input.[43]

The field includes [speech recognition](speech_recognition "wikilink"),
[image classification](image_classification "wikilink"), [facial
recognition](facial_recognition_system "wikilink"), [object
recognition](object_recognition "wikilink"), and [robotic
perception](robotic_sensing "wikilink").

### Social intelligence

<figure>
<img src="Kismet-IMG_6007-gradient.jpg"
title="Kismet, a robot head which was made in the 1990s; a machine that can recognize and simulate emotions." />
<figcaption><a href="Kismet_(robot)" title="wikilink">Kismet</a>, a
robot head which was made in the 1990s; a machine that can recognize and
simulate emotions.</figcaption>
</figure>

[Affective computing](Affective_computing "wikilink") is an
interdisciplinary umbrella that comprises systems that recognize,
interpret, process, or simulate human [feeling, emotion, and
mood](Affect_(psychology) "wikilink").[44] For example, some [virtual
assistants](virtual_assistant "wikilink") are programmed to speak
conversationally or even to banter humorously; it makes them appear more
sensitive to the emotional dynamics of human interaction, or to
otherwise facilitate [human–computer
interaction](human–computer_interaction "wikilink").

However, this tends to give naïve users an unrealistic conception of the
intelligence of existing computer agents. Moderate successes related to
affective computing include textual [sentiment
analysis](sentiment_analysis "wikilink") and, more recently, [multimodal
sentiment analysis](multimodal_sentiment_analysis "wikilink"), wherein
AI classifies the affects displayed by a videotaped subject.

### General intelligence

A machine with [artificial general
intelligence](artificial_general_intelligence "wikilink") should be able
to solve a wide variety of problems with breadth and versatility similar
to human intelligence.[45]

## Techniques

AI research uses a wide variety of techniques to accomplish the goals
above.

### Search and optimization

AI can solve many problems by intelligently searching through many
possible solutions.[46] There are two very different kinds of search
used in AI: [state space search](state_space_search "wikilink") and
[local search](Local_search_(optimization) "wikilink").

#### State space search

[State space search](State_space_search "wikilink") searches through a
tree of possible states to try to find a goal state.[47] For example,
[planning](Automated_planning_and_scheduling "wikilink") algorithms
search through trees of goals and subgoals, attempting to find a path to
a target goal, a process called [means-ends
analysis](means-ends_analysis "wikilink").

[Simple exhaustive searches](Brute_force_search "wikilink")[48] are
rarely sufficient for most real-world problems: the [search
space](Search_algorithm "wikilink") (the number of places to search)
quickly grows to [astronomical
numbers](Astronomically_large "wikilink"). The result is a search that
is [too slow](Computation_time "wikilink") or never completes.[49]
"[Heuristics](Heuristics "wikilink")" or "rules of thumb" can help
prioritize choices that are more likely to reach a goal.[50]

[Adversarial search](Adversarial_search "wikilink") is used for
[game-playing](game_AI "wikilink") programs, such as chess or Go. It
searches through a [tree](Game_tree "wikilink") of possible moves and
counter-moves, looking for a winning position.[51]

#### Local search

![Illustration of [gradient descent](gradient_descent "wikilink") for 3
different starting points. Two parameters (represented by the plan
coordinates) are adjusted in order to minimize the [loss
function](loss_function "wikilink") (the
height).](Gradient_descent.gif "Illustration of gradient descent for 3 different starting points. Two parameters (represented by the plan coordinates) are adjusted in order to minimize the loss function (the height).")[Local
search](Local_search_(optimization) "wikilink") uses [mathematical
optimization](mathematical_optimization "wikilink") to find a solution
to a problem. It begins with some form of guess and refines it
incrementally.<ref name="Local search2">[Local](Local_search_(optimization) "wikilink")
or "[optimization](Mathematical_optimization "wikilink")" search:

-   </ref>

[Gradient descent](Gradient_descent "wikilink") is a type of local
search that optimizes a set of numerical parameters by incrementally
adjusting them to minimize a [loss function](loss_function "wikilink").
Variants of gradient descent are commonly used to train neural
networks.[52]

Another type of local search is [evolutionary
computation](evolutionary_computation "wikilink"), which aims to
iteratively improve a set of candidate solutions by "mutating" and
"recombining" them, [selecting](Artificial_selection "wikilink") only
the fittest to survive each generation.[53]

Distributed search processes can coordinate via [swarm
intelligence](swarm_intelligence "wikilink") algorithms. Two popular
swarm algorithms used in search are [particle swarm
optimization](particle_swarm_optimization "wikilink") (inspired by bird
[flocking](Flocking_(behavior) "wikilink")) and [ant colony
optimization](ant_colony_optimization "wikilink") (inspired by [ant
trails](ant_trail "wikilink")).

### Logic

Formal [logic](logic "wikilink") is used for
[reasoning](automatic_reasoning "wikilink") and [knowledge
representation](knowledge_representation "wikilink").[54] Formal logic
comes in two main forms: [propositional
logic](propositional_logic "wikilink") (which operates on statements
that are true or false and uses [logical
connectives](logical_connective "wikilink") such as "and", "or", "not"
and "implies")[55]

[Deductive reasoning](Deductive_reasoning "wikilink") in logic is the
process of [proving](logical_proof "wikilink") a new statement
([conclusion](Logical_consequence "wikilink")) from other statements
that are given and assumed to be true (the
[premises](premise "wikilink")).[56] Proofs can be structured as proof
[trees](tree_structure "wikilink"), in which nodes are labelled by
sentences, and children nodes are connected to parent nodes by
[inference rules](inference_rule "wikilink").

Given a problem and a set of premises, problem-solving reduces to
searching for a proof tree whose root node is labelled by a solution of
the problem and whose leaf nodes are labelled by premises or
[axioms](axiom "wikilink"). In the case of [Horn
clauses](Horn_clause "wikilink"), problem-solving search can be
performed by reasoning [forwards](Forward_chaining "wikilink") from the
premises or [backwards](backward_chaining "wikilink") from the
problem.[57] In the more general case of the clausal form of
[first-order logic](first-order_logic "wikilink"),
[resolution](resolution_(logic) "wikilink") is a single, axiom-free rule
of inference, in which a problem is solved by proving a contradiction
from premises that include the negation of the problem to be solved.[58]

Inference in both Horn clause logic and first-order logic is
[undecidable](Undecidable_problem "wikilink"), and therefore
[intractable](Intractable_problem "wikilink"). However, backward
reasoning with Horn clauses, which underpins computation in the [logic
programming](logic_programming "wikilink") language
[Prolog](Prolog "wikilink"), is [Turing
complete](Turing_completeness "wikilink"). Moreover, its efficiency is
competitive with computation in other [symbolic
programming](symbolic_programming "wikilink") languages.[59]

[Fuzzy logic](Fuzzy_logic "wikilink") assigns a "degree of truth"
between 0 and 1. It can therefore handle propositions that are vague and
partially true.[60]

[Non-monotonic logics](Non-monotonic_logic "wikilink"), including logic
programming with [negation as failure](negation_as_failure "wikilink"),
are designed to handle [default
reasoning](default_reasoning "wikilink").[61] Other specialized versions
of logic have been developed to describe many complex domains.

### Probabilistic methods for uncertain reasoning

<img src="SimpleBayesNet.svg"
title="A simple Bayesian network, with the associated conditional probability tables"
width="380" height="380"
alt="A simple Bayesian network, with the associated conditional probability tables" />
Many problems in AI (including in reasoning, planning, learning,
perception, and robotics) require the agent to operate with incomplete
or uncertain information. AI researchers have devised a number of tools
to solve these problems using methods from
[probability](probability "wikilink") theory and economics.[62] Precise
mathematical tools have been developed that analyze how an agent can
make choices and plan, using [decision
theory](decision_theory "wikilink"), [decision
analysis](decision_analysis "wikilink"),[63] and [information value
theory](information_value_theory "wikilink").[64] These tools include
models such as [Markov decision
processes](Markov_decision_process "wikilink"),[65] dynamic [decision
networks](decision_network "wikilink"),[66] [game
theory](game_theory "wikilink") and [mechanism
design](mechanism_design "wikilink").[67]

[Bayesian networks](Bayesian_network "wikilink")[68] are a tool that can
be used for [reasoning](automated_reasoning "wikilink") (using the
[Bayesian inference](Bayesian_inference "wikilink") algorithm),[69]
[learning](Machine_learning "wikilink") (using the
[expectation–maximization
algorithm](expectation–maximization_algorithm "wikilink")),[70]
[planning](Automated_planning_and_scheduling "wikilink") (using
[decision networks](decision_network "wikilink"))[71] and
[perception](Machine_perception "wikilink") (using [dynamic Bayesian
networks](dynamic_Bayesian_network "wikilink")).[72]

Probabilistic algorithms can also be used for filtering, prediction,
smoothing, and finding explanations for streams of data, thus helping
[perception](Machine_perception "wikilink") systems analyze processes
that occur over time (e.g., [hidden Markov
models](hidden_Markov_model "wikilink") or [Kalman
filters](Kalman_filter "wikilink")).[73]
[thumb|upright=1.2|[Expectation–maximization](Expectation–maximization_algorithm "wikilink")
[clustering](cluster_analysis "wikilink") of [Old
Faithful](Old_Faithful "wikilink") eruption data starts from a random
guess but then successfully converges on an accurate clustering of the
two physically distinct modes of
eruption.](File:EM_Clustering_of_Old_Faithful_data.gif "wikilink")

### Classifiers and statistical learning methods

The simplest AI applications can be divided into two types: classifiers
(e.g., "if shiny then diamond"), on one hand, and controllers (e.g., "if
diamond then pick up"), on the other hand.
[Classifiers](Classifier_(mathematics) "wikilink")[74] are functions
that use [pattern matching](pattern_matching "wikilink") to determine
the closest match. They can be fine-tuned based on chosen examples using
[supervised learning](supervised_learning "wikilink"). Each pattern
(also called an "[observation](random_variate "wikilink")") is labeled
with a certain predefined class. All the observations combined with
their class labels are known as a [data set](data_set "wikilink"). When
a new observation is received, that observation is classified based on
previous experience.[75]

There are many kinds of classifiers in use. The [decision
tree](decision_tree "wikilink") is the simplest and most widely used
symbolic machine learning algorithm.[76] [K-nearest
neighbor](K-nearest_neighbor "wikilink") algorithm was the most widely
used analogical AI until the mid-1990s, and [Kernel
methods](Kernel_methods "wikilink") such as the [support vector
machine](support_vector_machine "wikilink") (SVM) displaced k-nearest
neighbor in the 1990s.[77] The [naive Bayes
classifier](naive_Bayes_classifier "wikilink") is reportedly the "most
widely used learner" at Google, due in part to its scalability.[78]
[Neural networks](Artificial_neural_network "wikilink") are also used as
classifiers.[79]

### Artificial neural networks

<figure>
<img src="Artificial_neural_network.svg"
title="A neural network is an interconnected group of nodes, akin to the vast network of neurons in the human brain." />
<figcaption>A neural network is an interconnected group of nodes, akin
to the vast network of <a href="neuron" title="wikilink">neurons</a> in
the <a href="human_brain" title="wikilink">human brain</a>.</figcaption>
</figure>

An artificial neural network is based on a collection of nodes also
known as [artificial neurons](artificial_neurons "wikilink"), which
loosely model the [neurons](neurons "wikilink") in a biological brain.
It is trained to recognise patterns; once trained, it can recognise
those patterns in fresh data. There is an input, at least one hidden
layer of nodes and an output. Each node applies a function and once the
[weight](Weighting "wikilink") crosses its specified threshold, the data
is transmitted to the next layer. A network is typically called a deep
neural network if it has at least 2 hidden layers.[80]

Learning algorithms for neural networks use [local
search](local_search_(optimization) "wikilink") to choose the weights
that will get the right output for each input during training. The most
common training technique is the
[backpropagation](backpropagation "wikilink") algorithm.[81] Neural
networks learn to model complex relationships between inputs and outputs
and [find patterns](Pattern_recognition "wikilink") in data. In theory,
a neural network can learn any function.[82]

In [feedforward neural networks](feedforward_neural_network "wikilink")
the signal passes in only one direction.[83] [Recurrent neural
networks](Recurrent_neural_network "wikilink") feed the output signal
back into the input, which allows short-term memories of previous input
events. [Long short term memory](Long_short_term_memory "wikilink") is
the most successful network architecture for recurrent networks.[84]
[Perceptrons](Perceptron "wikilink")[85] use only a single layer of
neurons, deep learning[86] uses multiple layers. [Convolutional neural
networks](Convolutional_neural_network "wikilink") strengthen the
connection between neurons that are "close" to each other—this is
especially important in [image processing](image_processing "wikilink"),
where a local set of neurons must [identify an
"edge"](edge_detection "wikilink") before the network can identify an
object.[87]

### Deep learning

![](AI_hierarchy.svg "AI_hierarchy.svg") Deep learning[88] uses several
layers of neurons between the network's inputs and outputs. The multiple
layers can progressively extract higher-level features from the raw
input. For example, in [image processing](image_processing "wikilink"),
lower layers may identify edges, while higher layers may identify the
concepts relevant to a human such as digits, letters, or faces.

Deep learning has profoundly improved the performance of programs in
many important subfields of artificial intelligence, including [computer
vision](computer_vision "wikilink"), [speech
recognition](speech_recognition "wikilink"), [natural language
processing](natural_language_processing "wikilink"), [image
classification](image_classification "wikilink"), and others. The reason
that deep learning performs so well in so many applications is not known
as of 2023. The sudden success of deep learning in 2012–2015 did not
occur because of some new discovery or theoretical breakthrough (deep
neural networks and backpropagation had been described by many people,
as far back as the 1950s) but because of two factors: the incredible
increase in computer power (including the hundred-fold increase in speed
by switching to [GPUs](Graphics_processing_units "wikilink")) and the
availability of vast amounts of training data, especially the giant
[curated
datasets](List_of_datasets_for_machine-learning_research "wikilink")
used for benchmark testing, such as [ImageNet](ImageNet "wikilink").

### GPT

[Generative pre-trained
transformers](Generative_pre-trained_transformer "wikilink") (GPT) are
[large language models](large_language_model "wikilink") that are based
on the semantic relationships between words in sentences ([natural
language processing](natural_language_processing "wikilink")).
Text-based GPT models are pre-trained on a large corpus of text which
can be from the internet. The pre-training consists in predicting the
next [token](Lexical_analysis "wikilink") (a token being usually a word,
subword, or punctuation). Throughout this pre-training, GPT models
accumulate knowledge about the world, and can then generate human-like
text by repeatedly predicting the next token. Typically, a subsequent
training phase makes the model more truthful, useful and harmless,
usually with a technique called [reinforcement learning from human
feedback](reinforcement_learning_from_human_feedback "wikilink") (RLHF).
Current GPT models are still prone to generating falsehoods called
"[hallucinations](Hallucination_(artificial_intelligence) "wikilink")",
although this can be reduced with RLHF and quality data. They are used
in [chatbots](chatbot "wikilink"), which allow you to ask a question or
request a task in simple text.[89]

Current models and services include:
[Gemini](Gemini_(chatbot) "wikilink") (formerly Bard),
[ChatGPT](ChatGPT "wikilink"), [Grok](Grok_(chatbot) "wikilink"),
[Claude](Anthropic#Claude "wikilink"),
[Copilot](Microsoft_Copilot "wikilink") and
[LLaMA](LLaMA "wikilink").[90]
[Multimodal](Multimodal_learning "wikilink") GPT models can process
different types of data
([modalities](Modality_(human–computer_interaction) "wikilink")) such as
images, videos, sound, and text.

### Specialized hardware and software

In the late 2010s, [graphics processing
units](graphics_processing_unit "wikilink") (GPUs) that were
increasingly designed with AI-specific enhancements and used with
specialized [TensorFlow](TensorFlow "wikilink") software had replaced
previously used [central processing
unit](central_processing_unit "wikilink") (CPUs) as the dominant means
for large-scale (commercial and academic) [machine
learning](machine_learning "wikilink") models' training. Specialized
[programming languages](Programming_language "wikilink") such as
[Prolog](Prolog "wikilink") were used in early AI research,[91] but
[general-purpose programming
languages](General-purpose_programming_language "wikilink") like
[Python](Python_(programming_language) "wikilink") have become
predominant.[92]

## Applications

AI and machine learning technology is used in most of the essential
applications of the 2020s, including: [search
engines](search_engines "wikilink") (such as [Google
Search](Google_Search "wikilink")), [targeting online
advertisements](Targeted_advertising "wikilink"), [recommendation
systems](Recommender_system "wikilink") (offered by
[Netflix](Netflix "wikilink"), [YouTube](YouTube "wikilink") or
[Amazon](Amazon_(company) "wikilink")), driving [internet
traffic](internet_traffic "wikilink"), [targeted
advertising](Marketing_and_artificial_intelligence "wikilink")
([AdSense](AdSense "wikilink"), [Facebook](Facebook "wikilink")),
[virtual assistants](virtual_assistant "wikilink") (such as
[Siri](Siri "wikilink") or [Alexa](Amazon_Alexa "wikilink")),
[autonomous vehicles](autonomous_vehicles "wikilink") (including
[drones](Unmanned_aerial_vehicle "wikilink"),
[ADAS](Advanced_driver-assistance_system "wikilink") and [self-driving
cars](self-driving_cars "wikilink")), [automatic language
translation](Machine_translation "wikilink") ([Microsoft
Translator](Microsoft_Translator "wikilink"), [Google
Translate](Google_Translate "wikilink")), [facial
recognition](Facial_recognition_system "wikilink")
([Apple](Apple_Computer "wikilink")'s [Face ID](Face_ID "wikilink") or
[Microsoft](Microsoft "wikilink")'s [DeepFace](DeepFace "wikilink") and
[Google](Google "wikilink")'s [FaceNet](FaceNet "wikilink")) and [image
labeling](Automatic_image_annotation "wikilink") (used by
[Facebook](Facebook "wikilink"), Apple's [iPhoto](iPhoto "wikilink") and
[TikTok](TikTok "wikilink")).

### Health and medicine

The application of AI in [medicine](medicine "wikilink") and [medical
research](medical_research "wikilink") has the potential to increase
patient care and quality of life.[93] Through the lens of the
[Hippocratic Oath](Hippocratic_Oath "wikilink"), medical professionals
are ethically compelled to use AI, if applications can more accurately
diagnose and treat patients.

For medical research, AI is an important tool for processing and
integrating [big data](big_data "wikilink"). This is particularly
important for [organoid](organoid "wikilink") and [tissue
engineering](tissue_engineering "wikilink") development which use
[microscopy](microscopy "wikilink") imaging as a key technique in
fabrication.[94] It has been suggested that AI can overcome
discrepancies in funding allocated to different fields of research.[95]
New AI tools can deepen the understanding of biomedically relevant
pathways. For example, [AlphaFold 2](AlphaFold_2 "wikilink") (2021)
demonstrated the ability to approximate, in hours rather than months,
the 3D [structure of a protein](Protein_structure "wikilink").[96] In
2023, it was reported that AI-guided drug discovery helped find a class
of antibiotics capable of killing two different types of drug-resistant
bacteria.[97] In 2024, researchers used machine learning to accelerate
the search for [Parkinson's disease](Parkinson's_disease "wikilink")
drug treatments. Their aim was to identify compounds that block the
clumping, or aggregation, of
[alpha-synuclein](alpha-synuclein "wikilink") (the protein that
characterises Parkinson's disease). They were able to speed up the
initial screening process ten-fold and reduce the cost by a
thousand-fold.[98][99]

### Games

[Game playing](Game_AI "wikilink") programs have been used since the
1950s to demonstrate and test AI's most advanced techniques.[100] [Deep
Blue](IBM_Deep_Blue "wikilink") became the first computer chess-playing
system to beat a reigning world chess champion, [Garry
Kasparov](Garry_Kasparov "wikilink"), on 11 May 1997.[101] In 2011, in a
*[Jeopardy!](Jeopardy! "wikilink")* [quiz show](quiz_show "wikilink")
exhibition match, [IBM](IBM "wikilink")'s [question answering
system](question_answering_system "wikilink"),
[Watson](Watson_(artificial_intelligence_software) "wikilink"), defeated
the two greatest *Jeopardy!* champions, [Brad
Rutter](Brad_Rutter "wikilink") and [Ken
Jennings](Ken_Jennings "wikilink"), by a significant margin.[102] In
March 2016, [AlphaGo](AlphaGo "wikilink") won 4 out of 5 games of
[Go](Go_(game) "wikilink") in a match with Go champion [Lee
Sedol](Lee_Sedol "wikilink"), becoming the first [computer
Go](computer_Go "wikilink")-playing system to beat a professional Go
player without [handicaps](Go_handicaps "wikilink"). Then in 2017 it
[defeated Ke Jie](AlphaGo_versus_Ke_Jie "wikilink"), who was the best Go
player in the world.[103] Other programs handle
[imperfect-information](Imperfect_information "wikilink") games, such as
the [poker](poker "wikilink")-playing program
[Pluribus](Pluribus_(poker_bot) "wikilink").[104]
[DeepMind](DeepMind "wikilink") developed increasingly generalistic
[reinforcement learning](reinforcement_learning "wikilink") models, such
as with [MuZero](MuZero "wikilink"), which could be trained to play
chess, Go, or [Atari](Atari "wikilink") games.[105] In 2019, DeepMind's
AlphaStar achieved grandmaster level in [StarCraft
II](StarCraft_II "wikilink"), a particularly challenging real-time
strategy game that involves incomplete knowledge of what happens on the
map.[106] In 2021, an AI agent competed in a PlayStation Gran Turismo
competition, winning against four of the world's best Gran Turismo
drivers using deep reinforcement learning.[107]

### Finance

Finance is one of the fastest growing sectors where applied AI tools are
being deployed: from retail online banking to investment advice and
insurance, where automated "robot advisers" have been in use for some
years. [108]

[World Pensions](World_Pensions_&_Investments_Forum "wikilink") experts
like Nicolas Firzli insist it may be too early to see the emergence of
highly innovative AI-informed financial products and services: "the
deployment of AI tools will simply further automatise things: destroying
tens of thousands of jobs in banking, financial planning, and pension
advice in the process, but I’m not sure it will unleash a new wave of
\[e.g., sophisticated\] pension innovation."[109]

### Military

Various countries are deploying AI military applications.[110] The main
applications enhance [command and
control](command_and_control "wikilink"), communications, sensors,
integration and interoperability.[111] Research is targeting
intelligence collection and analysis, logistics, cyber operations,
information operations, and semiautonomous and [autonomous
vehicles](Vehicular_automation "wikilink").[112] AI technologies enable
coordination of sensors and effectors, threat detection and
identification, marking of enemy positions, [target
acquisition](target_acquisition "wikilink"), coordination and
deconfliction of distributed [Joint
Fires](Forward_observers_in_the_U.S._military "wikilink") between
networked combat vehicles involving manned and unmanned teams.[113] AI
was incorporated into military operations in Iraq and Syria.[114]

In November 2023, US Vice President [Kamala
Harris](Kamala_Harris "wikilink") disclosed a declaration signed by 31
nations to set guardrails for the military use of AI. The commitments
include using legal reviews to ensure the compliance of military AI with
international laws, and being cautious and transparent in the
development of this technology.[115]

### Generative AI

![Vincent van Gogh in watercolour created by generative AI
software](Vincent_van_Gogh_in_watercolour.png "Vincent van Gogh in watercolour created by generative AI software")
In the early 2020s, [generative AI](generative_AI "wikilink") gained
widespread prominence. In March 2023, 58% of U.S. adults had heard about
[ChatGPT](ChatGPT "wikilink") and 14% had tried it.[116] The increasing
realism and ease-of-use of AI-based
[text-to-image](Text-to-image_model "wikilink") generators such as
[Midjourney](Midjourney "wikilink"), [DALL-E](DALL-E "wikilink"), and
[Stable Diffusion](Stable_Diffusion "wikilink") sparked a trend of
[viral](Viral_phenomenon "wikilink") AI-generated photos. Widespread
attention was gained by a fake photo of [Pope
Francis](Pope_Francis "wikilink") wearing a white puffer coat, the
fictional arrest of [Donald Trump](Donald_Trump "wikilink"), and a hoax
of an attack on the [Pentagon](The_Pentagon "wikilink"), as well as the
usage in professional creative arts.[117][118]

### Other industry-specific tasks

There are also thousands of successful AI applications used to solve
specific problems for specific industries or institutions. In a 2017
survey, one in five companies reported having incorporated "AI" in some
offerings or processes.[119] A few examples are [energy
storage](energy_storage "wikilink"), medical diagnosis, military
logistics, applications that predict the result of judicial decisions,
[foreign policy](foreign_policy "wikilink"), or supply chain management.

In agriculture, AI has helped farmers identify areas that need
irrigation, fertilization, pesticide treatments or increasing yield.
Agronomists use AI to conduct research and development. AI has been used
to predict the ripening time for crops such as tomatoes, monitor soil
moisture, operate agricultural robots, conduct predictive analytics,
classify livestock pig call emotions, automate greenhouses, detect
diseases and pests, and save water.

Artificial intelligence is used in astronomy to analyze increasing
amounts of available data and applications, mainly for "classification,
regression, clustering, forecasting, generation, discovery, and the
development of new scientific insights" for example for discovering
exoplanets, forecasting solar activity, and distinguishing between
signals and instrumental effects in gravitational wave astronomy. It
could also be used for activities in space such as space exploration,
including analysis of data from space missions, real-time science
decisions of spacecraft, space debris avoidance, and more autonomous
operation.

## Ethics

AI has potential benefits and potential risks. AI may be able to advance
science and find solutions for serious problems: [Demis
Hassabis](Demis_Hassabis "wikilink") of [Deep Mind](DeepMind "wikilink")
hopes to "solve intelligence, and then use that to solve everything
else". However, as the use of AI has become widespread, several
unintended consequences and risks have been identified. In-production
systems can sometimes not factor ethics and bias into their AI training
processes, especially when the AI algorithms are inherently
unexplainable in deep learning.

### Risks and harm

#### Privacy and copyright

Machine-learning algorithms require large amounts of data. The
techniques used to acquire this data have raised concerns about
[privacy](privacy "wikilink"), [surveillance](surveillance "wikilink")
and [copyright](copyright "wikilink").

Technology companies collect a wide range of data from their users,
including online activity, geolocation data, video and audio. For
example, in order to build [speech
recognition](speech_recognition "wikilink") algorithms,
[Amazon](Amazon_(company) "wikilink") has recorded millions of private
conversations and allowed [temporary
workers](temporary_worker "wikilink") to listen to and transcribe some
of them. Opinions about this widespread
[surveillance](surveillance "wikilink") range from those who see it as a
[necessary evil](necessary_evil "wikilink") to those for whom it is
clearly [unethical](unethical "wikilink") and a violation of the [right
to privacy](right_to_privacy "wikilink").

AI developers argue that this is the only way to deliver valuable
applications. and have developed several techniques that attempt to
preserve privacy while still obtaining the data, such as [data
aggregation](data_aggregation "wikilink"),
[de-identification](de-identification "wikilink") and [differential
privacy](differential_privacy "wikilink"). Since 2016, some privacy
experts, such as [Cynthia Dwork](Cynthia_Dwork "wikilink"), have begun
to view privacy in terms of
[fairness](fairness_(machine_learning) "wikilink"). [Brian
Christian](Brian_Christian "wikilink") wrote that experts have pivoted
"from the question of 'what they know' to the question of 'what they're
doing with it'."

Generative AI is often trained on unlicensed copyrighted works,
including in domains such as images or computer code; the output is then
used under the rationale of "[fair use](fair_use "wikilink")". Experts
disagree about how well and under what circumstances this rationale will
hold up in courts of law; relevant factors may include "the purpose and
character of the use of the copyrighted work" and "the effect upon the
potential market for the copyrighted work".[120] Website owners who do
not wish to have their content scraped can indicate it in a
"[robots.txt](robots.txt "wikilink")" file.[121] In 2023, leading
authors (including [John Grisham](John_Grisham "wikilink") and [Jonathan
Franzen](Jonathan_Franzen "wikilink")) sued AI companies for using their
work to train generative AI. Another discussed approach is to envision a
separate *[sui generis](sui_generis "wikilink")* system of protection
for creations generated by AI to ensure fair attribution and
compensation for human authors.[122]

#### Misinformation

[YouTube](YouTube "wikilink"), [Facebook](Facebook "wikilink") and
others use [recommender systems](recommender_system "wikilink") to guide
users to more content. These AI programs were given the goal of
[maximizing](mathematical_optimization "wikilink") user engagement (that
is, the only goal was to keep people watching). The AI learned that
users tended to choose [misinformation](misinformation "wikilink"),
[conspiracy theories](conspiracy_theory "wikilink"), and extreme
[partisan](partisan_(politics) "wikilink") content, and, to keep them
watching, the AI recommended more of it. Users also tended to watch more
content on the same subject, so the AI led people into [filter
bubbles](filter_bubbles "wikilink") where they received multiple
versions of the same misinformation. This convinced many users that the
misinformation was true, and ultimately undermined trust in
institutions, the media and the government.[123] The AI program had
correctly learned to maximize its goal, but the result was harmful to
society. After the U.S. election in 2016, major technology companies
took steps to mitigate the problem.

In 2022, [generative AI](generative_AI "wikilink") began to create
images, audio, video and text that are indistinguishable from real
photographs, recordings, films or human writing. It is possible for bad
actors to use this technology to create massive amounts of
misinformation or propaganda. AI pioneer [Geoffrey
Hinton](Geoffrey_Hinton "wikilink") expressed concern about AI enabling
"authoritarian leaders to manipulate their electorates" on a large
scale, among other risks.

#### Algorithmic bias and fairness

Machine learning applications will be biased if they learn from biased
data. The developers may not be aware that the bias exists. Bias can be
introduced by the way [training data](training_data "wikilink") is
selected and by the way a model is deployed. If a biased algorithm is
used to make decisions that can seriously [harm](harm "wikilink") people
(as it can in [medicine](health_equity "wikilink"),
[finance](credit_rating "wikilink"),
[recruitment](recruitment "wikilink"),
[housing](public_housing "wikilink") or [policing](policing "wikilink"))
then the algorithm may cause
[discrimination](discrimination "wikilink").[124]
[Fairness](Fairness_(machine_learning) "wikilink") in machine learning
is the study of how to prevent the harm caused by algorithmic bias. It
has become serious area of academic study within AI. Researchers have
discovered it is not always possible to define "fairness" in a way that
satisfies all stakeholders.[125]

On June 28, 2015, [Google Photos](Google_Photos "wikilink")'s new image
labeling feature mistakenly identified Jacky Alcine and a friend as
"gorillas" because they were black. The system was trained on a dataset
that contained very few images of black people, a problem called "sample
size disparity". Google "fixed" this problem by preventing the system
from labelling *anything* as a "gorilla". Eight years later, in 2023,
Google Photos still could not identify a gorilla, and neither could
similar products from Apple, Facebook, Microsoft and Amazon.

[COMPAS](COMPAS_(software) "wikilink") is a commercial program widely
used by [U.S. courts](U.S._court "wikilink") to assess the likelihood of
a [defendant](defendant "wikilink") becoming a
[recidivist](recidivist "wikilink"). In 2016, [Julia
Angwin](Julia_Angwin "wikilink") at [ProPublica](ProPublica "wikilink")
discovered that COMPAS exhibited racial bias, despite the fact that the
program was not told the races of the defendants. Although the error
rate for both whites and blacks was calibrated equal at exactly 61%, the
errors for each race were different—the system consistently
overestimated the chance that a black person would re-offend and would
underestimate the chance that a white person would not re-offend. In
2017, several researchers showed that it was mathematically impossible
for COMPAS to accommodate all possible measures of fairness when the
base rates of re-offense were different for whites and blacks in the
data.[126]

A program can make biased decisions even if the data does not explicitly
mention a problematic feature (such as "race" or "gender"). The feature
will correlate with other features (like "address", "shopping history"
or "first name"), and the program will make the same decisions based on
these features as it would on "race" or "gender".[127] Moritz Hardt said
"the most robust fact in this research area is that fairness through
blindness doesn't work."[128]

Criticism of COMPAS highlighted that machine learning models are
designed to make "predictions" that are only valid if we assume that the
future will resemble the past. If they are trained on data that includes
the results of racist decisions in the past, machine learning models
must predict that racist decisions will be made in the future. If an
application then uses these predictions as *recommendations*, some of
these "recommendations" will likely be racist.[129] Thus, machine
learning is not well suited to help make decisions in areas where there
is hope that the future will be *better* than the past. It is
necessarily descriptive and not proscriptive.

Bias and unfairness may go undetected because the developers are
overwhelmingly white and male: among AI engineers, about 4% are black
and 20% are women.

At its 2022 [Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency](ACM_Conference_on_Fairness,_Accountability,_and_Transparency "wikilink")
(ACM FAccT 2022), the [Association for Computing
Machinery](Association_for_Computing_Machinery "wikilink"), in Seoul,
South Korea, presented and published findings that recommend that until
AI and robotics systems are demonstrated to be free of bias mistakes,
they are unsafe, and the use of self-learning neural networks trained on
vast, unregulated sources of flawed internet data should be curtailed.

#### Lack of transparency

[upright=1.2|thumb|[Lidar](Lidar "wikilink") testing vehicle for
autonomous
driving](File:HiPhi_Z,_IAA_Summit_2023,_Munich_(P1120237).jpg "wikilink")
Many AI systems are so complex that their designers cannot explain how
they reach their decisions. Particularly with [deep neural
networks](deep_neural_networks "wikilink"), in which there are a large
amount of non-[linear](linear "wikilink") relationships between inputs
and outputs. But some popular explainability techniques exist.[130]

It is impossible to be certain that a program is operating correctly if
no one knows how exactly it works. There have been many cases where a
machine learning program passed rigorous tests, but nevertheless learned
something different than what the programmers intended. For example, a
system that could identify skin diseases better than medical
professionals was found to actually have a strong tendency to classify
images with a [ruler](ruler "wikilink") as "cancerous", because pictures
of malignancies typically include a ruler to show the scale. Another
machine learning system designed to help effectively allocate medical
resources was found to classify patients with asthma as being at "low
risk" of dying from pneumonia. Having asthma is actually a severe risk
factor, but since the patients having asthma would usually get much more
medical care, they were relatively unlikely to die according to the
training data. The correlation between asthma and low risk of dying from
pneumonia was real, but misleading.

People who have been harmed by an algorithm's decision have a right to
an explanation.[131] Doctors, for example, are expected to clearly and
completely explain to their colleagues the reasoning behind any decision
they make. Early drafts of the European Union's [General Data Protection
Regulation](General_Data_Protection_Regulation "wikilink") in 2016
included an explicit statement that this right exists. Industry experts
noted that this is an unsolved problem with no solution in sight.
Regulators argued that nevertheless the harm is real: if the problem has
no solution, the tools should not be used.

[DARPA](DARPA "wikilink") established the
[XAI](Explainable_Artificial_Intelligence "wikilink") ("Explainable
Artificial Intelligence") program in 2014 to try and solve these
problems.

There are several possible solutions to the transparency problem. SHAP
tried to solve the transparency problems by visualising the contribution
of each feature to the output. LIME can locally approximate a model with
a simpler, interpretable model. [Multitask
learning](Multitask_learning "wikilink") provides a large number of
outputs in addition to the target classification. These other outputs
can help developers deduce what the network has learned.
[Deconvolution](Deconvolution "wikilink"),
[DeepDream](DeepDream "wikilink") and other
[generative](generative_AI "wikilink") methods can allow developers to
see what different layers of a deep network have learned and produce
output that can suggest what the network is learning.

#### Bad actors and weaponized AI

Artificial intelligence provides a number of tools that are useful to
[bad actors](bad_actor "wikilink"), such as [authoritarian
governments](authoritarian "wikilink"),
[terrorists](terrorist "wikilink"), [criminals](criminals "wikilink") or
[rogue states](rogue_states "wikilink").

A lethal autonomous weapon is a machine that locates, selects and
engages human targets without human supervision. Widely available AI
tools can be used by bad actors to develop inexpensive autonomous
weapons and, if produced at scale, they are potentially [weapons of mass
destruction](weapons_of_mass_destruction "wikilink"). Even when used in
conventional warfare, it is unlikely that they will be unable to
reliably choose targets and could potentially [kill an innocent
person](murder "wikilink"). In 2014, 30 nations (including China)
supported a ban on autonomous weapons under the [United
Nations](United_Nations "wikilink")' [Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons](Convention_on_Certain_Conventional_Weapons "wikilink"), however
the [United States](United_States "wikilink") and others disagreed. By
2015, over fifty countries were reported to be researching battlefield
robots.[132]

AI tools make it easier for [authoritarian
governments](Authoritarian "wikilink") to efficiently control their
citizens in several ways. [Face](Facial_recognition_system "wikilink")
and [voice recognition](Speaker_recognition "wikilink") allow widespread
[surveillance](surveillance "wikilink"). [Machine
learning](Machine_learning "wikilink"), operating this data, can
[classify](classifier_(machine_learning) "wikilink") potential enemies
of the state and prevent them from hiding. [Recommendation
systems](recommender_system "wikilink") can precisely target
[propaganda](propaganda "wikilink") and
[misinformation](misinformation "wikilink") for maximum effect.
[Deepfakes](Deepfakes "wikilink") and [generative
AI](generative_AI "wikilink") aid in producing misinformation. Advanced
AI can make authoritarian [centralized decision
making](technocracy "wikilink") more competitive than liberal and
decentralized systems such as [markets](market_(economics) "wikilink").
It lowers the cost and difficulty of [digital
warfare](digital_warfare "wikilink") and [advanced
spyware](spyware "wikilink"). All these technologies have been available
since 2020 or earlier—AI [facial recognition
systems](facial_recognition_system "wikilink") are already being used
for [mass surveillance](mass_surveillance "wikilink") in
China.[133][134]

There many other ways that AI is expected to help bad actors, some of
which can not be foreseen. For example, machine-learning AI is able to
design tens of thousands of toxic molecules in a matter of hours.

#### Reliance on industry giants

Training AI systems requires an enormous amount of computing power.
Usually only [Big Tech](Big_Tech "wikilink") companies have the
financial resources to make such investments. Smaller startups such as
[Cohere](Cohere "wikilink") and [OpenAI](OpenAI "wikilink") end up
buying access to [data centers](data_centers "wikilink") from
[Google](Google "wikilink") and [Microsoft](Microsoft "wikilink")
respectively.[135]

#### Technological unemployment

Economists have frequently highlighted the risks of redundancies from
AI, and speculated about unemployment if there is no adequate social
policy for full employment.[136]

In the past, technology has tended to increase rather than reduce total
employment, but economists acknowledge that "we're in uncharted
territory" with AI.[137] A survey of economists showed disagreement
about whether the increasing use of robots and AI will cause a
substantial increase in long-term
[unemployment](unemployment "wikilink"), but they generally agree that
it could be a net benefit if [productivity](productivity "wikilink")
gains are
[redistributed](Redistribution_of_income_and_wealth "wikilink"). Risk
estimates vary; for example, in the 2010s, Michael Osborne and [Carl
Benedikt Frey](Carl_Benedikt_Frey "wikilink") estimated 47% of U.S. jobs
are at "high risk" of potential automation, while an OECD report
classified only 9% of U.S. jobs as "high risk".[138] The methodology of
speculating about future employment levels has been criticised as
lacking evidential foundation, and for implying that technology, rather
than social policy, creates unemployment, as opposed to
redundancies.[139] In April 2023, it was reported that 70% of the jobs
for Chinese video game illustrators had been eliminated by generative
artificial intelligence.[140][141]

Unlike previous waves of automation, many middle-class jobs may be
eliminated by artificial intelligence; *[The
Economist](The_Economist "wikilink")* stated in 2015 that "the worry
that AI could do to white-collar jobs what steam power did to
blue-collar ones during the Industrial Revolution" is "worth taking
seriously". Jobs at extreme risk range from
[paralegals](paralegal "wikilink") to fast food cooks, while job demand
is likely to increase for care-related professions ranging from personal
healthcare to the clergy.[142]

From the early days of the development of artificial intelligence, there
have been arguments, for example, those put forward by [Joseph
Weizenbaum](Joseph_Weizenbaum "wikilink"), about whether tasks that can
be done by computers actually should be done by them, given the
difference between computers and humans, and between quantitative
calculation and qualitative, value-based judgement.[143]

#### Existential risk

It has been argued AI will become so powerful that humanity may
irreversibly lose control of it. This could, as physicist [Stephen
Hawking](Stephen_Hawking "wikilink") stated, "[spell the end of the
human race](Global_catastrophic_risk "wikilink")". This scenario has
been common in science fiction, when a computer or robot suddenly
develops a human-like "self-awareness" (or "sentience" or
"consciousness") and becomes a malevolent character. These sci-fi
scenarios are misleading in several ways.

First, AI does not require human-like
"[sentience](sentience "wikilink")" to be an existential risk. Modern AI
programs are given specific goals and use learning and intelligence to
achieve them. Philosopher [Nick Bostrom](Nick_Bostrom "wikilink") argued
that if one gives *almost any* goal to a sufficiently powerful AI, it
may choose to destroy humanity to achieve it (he used the example of a
[paperclip factory
manager](Instrumental_convergence#Paperclip_maximizer "wikilink")).
[Stuart Russell](Stuart_J._Russell "wikilink") gives the example of
household robot that tries to find a way to kill its owner to prevent it
from being unplugged, reasoning that "you can't fetch the coffee if
you're dead." In order to be safe for humanity, a
[superintelligence](superintelligence "wikilink") would have to be
genuinely [aligned](AI_alignment "wikilink") with humanity's morality
and values so that it is "fundamentally on our side".[144]

Second, [Yuval Noah Harari](Yuval_Noah_Harari "wikilink") argues that AI
does not require a robot body or physical control to pose an existential
risk. The essential parts of civilization are not physical. Things like
[ideologies](ideology "wikilink"), [law](law "wikilink"),
[government](government "wikilink"), [money](money "wikilink") and the
[economy](economy "wikilink") are made of
[language](language "wikilink"); they exist because there are stories
that billions of people believe. The current prevalence of
[misinformation](misinformation "wikilink") suggests that an AI could
use language to convince people to believe anything, even to take
actions that are destructive.

The opinions amongst experts and industry insiders are mixed, with
sizable fractions both concerned and unconcerned by risk from eventual
superintelligent AI. Personalities such as [Stephen
Hawking](Stephen_Hawking "wikilink"), [Bill
Gates](Bill_Gates "wikilink"), and [Elon Musk](Elon_Musk "wikilink")
have expressed concern about existential risk from AI.[145] AI pioneers
including [Fei-Fei Li](Fei-Fei_Li "wikilink"), [Geoffrey
Hinton](Geoffrey_Hinton "wikilink"), [Yoshua
Bengio](Yoshua_Bengio "wikilink"), [Cynthia
Breazeal](Cynthia_Breazeal "wikilink"), [Rana el
Kaliouby](Rana_el_Kaliouby "wikilink"), [Demis
Hassabis](Demis_Hassabis "wikilink"), [Joy
Buolamwini](Joy_Buolamwini "wikilink"), and [Sam
Altman](Sam_Altman "wikilink") have expressed concerns about the risks
of AI. In 2023, many leading AI experts issued the joint statement that
"Mitigating the risk of extinction from AI should be a global priority
alongside other societal-scale risks such as pandemics and nuclear war".

Other researchers, however, spoke in favor of a less dystopian view. AI
pioneer [Juergen Schmidhuber](Juergen_Schmidhuber "wikilink") did not
sign the joint statement, emphasising that in 95% of all cases, AI
research is about making "human lives longer and healthier and
easier."[146] While the tools that are now being used to improve lives
can also be used by bad actors, "they can also be used against the bad
actors."[147][148] [Andrew Ng](Andrew_Ng "wikilink") also argued that
"it's a mistake to fall for the doomsday hype on AI—and that regulators
who do will only benefit vested interests."[149] [Yann
LeCun](Yann_LeCun "wikilink") "scoffs at his peers' dystopian scenarios
of supercharged misinformation and even, eventually, human
extinction."[150] In the early 2010s, experts argued that the risks are
too distant in the future to warrant research or that humans will be
valuable from the perspective of a superintelligent machine.[151]
However, after 2016, the study of current and future risks and possible
solutions became a serious area of research.

### Ethical machines and alignment

Friendly AI are machines that have been designed from the beginning to
minimize risks and to make choices that benefit humans. [Eliezer
Yudkowsky](Eliezer_Yudkowsky "wikilink"), who coined the term, argues
that developing friendly AI should be a higher research priority: it may
require a large investment and it must be completed before AI becomes an
existential risk.

Machines with intelligence have the potential to use their intelligence
to make ethical decisions. The field of machine ethics provides machines
with ethical principles and procedures for resolving ethical dilemmas.
The field of machine ethics is also called computational morality, and
was founded at an [AAAI](AAAI "wikilink") symposium in 2005.

Other approaches include [Wendell Wallach](Wendell_Wallach "wikilink")'s
"artificial moral agents" and [Stuart J.
Russell](Stuart_J._Russell "wikilink")'s [three
principles](Human_Compatible#Russell's_three_principles "wikilink") for
developing provably beneficial machines.

### Open source

Active organizations in the AI open-source community include [Hugging
Face](Hugging_Face "wikilink"),[152] [Google](Google "wikilink"),[153]
[EleutherAI](EleutherAI "wikilink") and
[Meta](Meta_Platforms "wikilink").[154] Various AI models, such as
[Llama 2](LLaMA "wikilink"), [Mistral](Mistral_AI "wikilink") or [Stable
Diffusion](Stable_Diffusion "wikilink"), have been made
open-weight,[155][156] meaning that their architecture and trained
parameters (the "weights") are publicly available. Open-weight models
can be freely [fine-tuned](Fine-tuning_(deep_learning) "wikilink"),
which allows companies to specialize them with their own data and for
their own use-case.[157] Open-weight models are useful for research and
innovation but can also be misused. Since they can be fine-tuned, any
built-in security measure, such as objecting to harmful requests, can be
trained away until it becomes ineffective. Some researchers warn that
future AI models may develop dangerous capabilities (such as the
potential to drastically facilitate
[bioterrorism](bioterrorism "wikilink")), and that once released on the
Internet, they can't be deleted everywhere if needed. They recommend
pre-release audits and cost-benefit analyses.[158]

### Frameworks

Artificial Intelligence projects can have their ethical permissibility
tested while designing, developing, and implementing an AI system. An AI
framework such as the Care and Act Framework containing the SUM
values—developed by the [Alan Turing
Institute](Alan_Turing_Institute "wikilink") tests projects in four main
areas:[159][160]

-   RESPECT the dignity of individual people
-   CONNECT with other people sincerely, openly and inclusively
-   CARE for the wellbeing of everyone
-   PROTECT social values, justice and the public interest

Other developments in ethical frameworks include those decided upon
during the [Asilomar
Conference](Asilomar_Conference_on_Beneficial_AI "wikilink"), the
Montreal Declaration for Responsible AI, and the IEEE's Ethics of
Autonomous Systems initiative, among others;[161] however, these
principles do not go without their criticisms, especially regards to the
people chosen contributes to these frameworks.[162]

Promotion of the wellbeing of the people and communities that these
technologies affect requires consideration of the social and ethical
implications at all stages of AI system design, development and
implementation, and collaboration between job roles such as data
scientists, product managers, data engineers, domain experts, and
delivery managers.[163]

The AI Safety Institute in the UK has released a testing toolset called
'Inspect' for AI safety evaluations available under a MIT open-source
licence which is freely available on GitHub and can be improved with
third-party packages. It can be used to evaluate AI models in a range of
areas including core knowledge, ability to reason, and autonomous
capabilities.[164]

### Regulation

[upright=1.2|thumb|alt=AI Safety Summit|The first global [AI Safety
Summit](AI_Safety_Summit "wikilink") was held in 2023 with a declaration
calling for international
co-operation.](File:Vice_President_Harris_at_the_group_photo_of_the_2023_AI_Safety_Summit.jpg "wikilink")
The regulation of artificial intelligence is the development of public
sector policies and laws for promoting and regulating artificial
intelligence (AI); it is therefore related to the broader regulation of
algorithms.[165] The regulatory and policy landscape for AI is an
emerging issue in jurisdictions globally. According to AI Index at
[Stanford](Stanford "wikilink"), the annual number of AI-related laws
passed in the 127 survey countries jumped from one passed in 2016 to 37
passed in 2022 alone. Between 2016 and 2020, more than 30 countries
adopted dedicated strategies for AI. Most EU member states had released
national AI strategies, as had Canada, China, India, Japan, Mauritius,
the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, U.S., and
Vietnam. Others were in the process of elaborating their own AI
strategy, including Bangladesh, Malaysia and Tunisia. The [Global
Partnership on Artificial
Intelligence](Global_Partnership_on_Artificial_Intelligence "wikilink")
was launched in June 2020, stating a need for AI to be developed in
accordance with human rights and democratic values, to ensure public
confidence and trust in the technology. [Henry
Kissinger](Henry_Kissinger "wikilink"), [Eric
Schmidt](Eric_Schmidt "wikilink"), and [Daniel
Huttenlocher](Daniel_P._Huttenlocher "wikilink") published a joint
statement in November 2021 calling for a government commission to
regulate AI. In 2023, OpenAI leaders published recommendations for the
governance of superintelligence, which they believe may happen in less
than 10 years. In 2023, the United Nations also launched an advisory
body to provide recommendations on AI governance; the body comprises
technology company executives, governments officials and academics.[166]

In a 2022 [Ipsos](Ipsos "wikilink") survey, attitudes towards AI varied
greatly by country; 78% of Chinese citizens, but only 35% of Americans,
agreed that "products and services using AI have more benefits than
drawbacks". A 2023 [Reuters](Reuters "wikilink")/Ipsos poll found that
61% of Americans agree, and 22% disagree, that AI poses risks to
humanity. In a 2023 [Fox News](Fox_News "wikilink") poll, 35% of
Americans thought it "very important", and an additional 41% thought it
"somewhat important", for the federal government to regulate AI, versus
13% responding "not very important" and 8% responding "not at all
important".

In November 2023, the first global [AI Safety
Summit](2023_AI_Safety_Summit "wikilink") was held in [Bletchley
Park](Bletchley_Park "wikilink") in the UK to discuss the near and far
term risks of AI and the possibility of mandatory and voluntary
regulatory frameworks.[167] 28 countries including the United States,
China, and the European Union issued a declaration at the start of the
summit, calling for international co-operation to manage the challenges
and risks of artificial intelligence.[168][169] In May 2024 at the [AI
Seoul Summit](AI_Summit_Seoul "wikilink"), 16 global AI tech companies
agreed to safety commitments on the development of AI.[170][171]

## History

The study of mechanical or "formal" reasoning began with philosophers
and mathematicians in antiquity. The study of logic led directly to
[Alan Turing](Alan_Turing "wikilink")'s [theory of
computation](theory_of_computation "wikilink"), which suggested that a
machine, by shuffling symbols as simple as "0" and "1", could simulate
any conceivable form of mathematical reasoning.[172] This, along with
concurrent discoveries in [cybernetics](cybernetics "wikilink"),
[information theory](information_theory "wikilink") and
[neurobiology](neurobiology "wikilink"), led researchers to consider the
possibility of building an "electronic brain". They developed several
areas of research that would become part of AI,[173] such as
[McCullouch](Warren_McCullouch "wikilink") and
[Pitts](Walter_Pitts "wikilink") design for "artificial neurons" in
1943, and Turing's influential 1950 paper '[Computing Machinery and
Intelligence](Computing_Machinery_and_Intelligence "wikilink")', which
introduced the [Turing test](Turing_test "wikilink") and showed that
"machine intelligence" was plausible.[174][175]

The field of AI research was founded at [a
workshop](Dartmouth_workshop "wikilink") at [Dartmouth
College](Dartmouth_College "wikilink") in 1956.[176] The attendees
became the leaders of AI research in the 1960s. They and their students
produced programs that the press described as "astonishing": computers
were learning [checkers](draughts "wikilink") strategies, solving word
problems in algebra, proving [logical theorems](Theorem "wikilink") and
speaking English.[177] Artificial intelligence laboratories were set up
at a number of British and U.S. Universities in the latter 1950s and
early 1960s.[178]

Researchers in the 1960s and the 1970s were convinced that their methods
would eventually succeed in creating a machine with [general
intelligence](artificial_general_intelligence "wikilink") and considered
this the goal of their field. [Herbert
Simon](Herbert_A._Simon "wikilink") predicted, "machines will be
capable, within twenty years, of doing any work a man can do".[179]
[Marvin Minsky](Marvin_Minsky "wikilink") agreed, writing, "within a
generation ... the problem of creating 'artificial intelligence' will
substantially be solved".[180] They had, however, underestimated the
difficulty of the problem. In 1974, both the U.S. and British
governments cut off exploratory research in response to the
[criticism](Lighthill_report "wikilink") of [Sir James
Lighthill](Sir_James_Lighthill "wikilink") and ongoing pressure from the
U.S. Congress to [fund more productive
projects](Mansfield_Amendment "wikilink").
[Minsky](Marvin_Minsky "wikilink")'s and
[Papert](Seymour_Papert "wikilink")'s book
*[Perceptrons](Perceptron "wikilink")* was understood as proving that
[artificial neural networks](artificial_neural_networks "wikilink")
would never be useful for solving real-world tasks, thus discrediting
the approach altogether. The "[AI winter](AI_winter "wikilink")", a
period when obtaining funding for AI projects was difficult,
followed.[181]

In the early 1980s, AI research was revived by the commercial success of
[expert systems](expert_system "wikilink"),[182] a form of AI program
that simulated the knowledge and analytical skills of human experts. By
1985, the market for AI had reached over a billion dollars. At the same
time, Japan's [fifth generation
computer](fifth_generation_computer "wikilink") project inspired the
U.S. and British governments to restore funding for [academic
research](academic_research "wikilink").[183] However, beginning with
the collapse of the [Lisp Machine](Lisp_Machine "wikilink") market in
1987, AI once again fell into disrepute, and a second, longer-lasting
winter began.[184]

Up to this point, most of AI's funding had gone to projects that used
high-level [symbols](symbolic_AI "wikilink") to represent [mental
objects](mental_objects "wikilink") like plans, goals, beliefs, and
known facts. In the 1980s, some researchers began to doubt that this
approach would be able to imitate all the processes of human cognition,
especially [perception](machine_perception "wikilink"),
[robotics](robotics "wikilink"), [learning](machine_learning "wikilink")
and [pattern recognition](pattern_recognition "wikilink"), and began to
look into "sub-symbolic" approaches. [Rodney
Brooks](Rodney_Brooks "wikilink") rejected "representation" in general
and focussed directly on engineering machines that move and survive.
[Judea Pearl](Judea_Pearl "wikilink"), [Lofti
Zadeh](Lofti_Zadeh "wikilink") and others developed methods that handled
incomplete and uncertain information by making reasonable guesses rather
than precise logic.[185] But the most important development was the
revival of "[connectionism](connectionism "wikilink")", including neural
network research, by [Geoffrey Hinton](Geoffrey_Hinton "wikilink") and
others.[186] In 1990, [Yann LeCun](Yann_LeCun "wikilink") successfully
showed that [convolutional neural
networks](convolutional_neural_networks "wikilink") can recognize
handwritten digits, the first of many successful applications of neural
networks.

AI gradually restored its reputation in the late 1990s and early 21st
century by exploiting formal mathematical methods and by finding
specific solutions to specific problems. This
"[narrow](narrow_AI "wikilink")" and "formal" focus allowed researchers
to produce verifiable results and collaborate with other fields (such as
[statistics](statistics "wikilink"), [economics](economics "wikilink")
and [mathematics](mathematical_optimization "wikilink")).[187] By 2000,
solutions developed by AI researchers were being widely used, although
in the 1990s they were rarely described as "artificial
intelligence".[188] However, several academic researchers became
concerned that AI was no longer pursuing its original goal of creating
versatile, fully intelligent machines. Beginning around 2002, they
founded the subfield of [artificial general
intelligence](artificial_general_intelligence "wikilink") (or "AGI"),
which had several well-funded institutions by the 2010s.[189]

[Deep learning](Deep_learning "wikilink") began to dominate industry
benchmarks in 2012 and was adopted throughout the field.[190] For many
specific tasks, other methods were abandoned. Deep learning's success
was based on both hardware improvements ([faster
computers](Moore's_law "wikilink"),[191] [graphics processing
units](graphics_processing_unit "wikilink"), [cloud
computing](cloud_computing "wikilink")) and access to [large amounts of
data](big_data "wikilink")[192] (including curated datasets, such as
[ImageNet](ImageNet "wikilink")). Deep learning's success led to an
enormous increase in interest and funding in AI. The amount of machine
learning research (measured by total publications) increased by 50% in
the years 2015–2019.

In 2016, issues of [fairness](algorithmic_fairness "wikilink") and the
misuse of technology were catapulted into center stage at machine
learning conferences, publications vastly increased, funding became
available, and many researchers re-focussed their careers on these
issues. The [alignment problem](AI_alignment "wikilink") became a
serious field of academic study.

In the late teens and early 2020s,
[AGI](artificial_general_intelligence "wikilink") companies began to
deliver programs that created enormous interest. In 2015,
[AlphaGo](AlphaGo "wikilink"), developed by
[DeepMind](DeepMind "wikilink"), beat the world champion [Go
player](Go_player "wikilink"). The program was taught only the rules of
the game and developed strategy by itself. [GPT-3](GPT-3 "wikilink") is
a [large language model](large_language_model "wikilink") that was
released in 2020 by [OpenAI](OpenAI "wikilink") and is capable of
generating high-quality human-like text.[193] These programs, and
others, inspired an aggressive [AI boom](AI_boom "wikilink"), where
large companies began investing billions in AI research. According to AI
Impacts, about $50 billion annually was invested in "AI" around 2022 in
the U.S. alone and about 20% of the new U.S. Computer Science PhD
graduates have specialized in "AI". About 800,000 "AI"-related U.S. job
openings existed in 2022.

## Philosophy

### Defining artificial intelligence

[Alan Turing](Alan_Turing "wikilink") wrote in 1950 "I propose to
consider the question 'can machines think'?" He advised changing the
question from whether a machine "thinks", to "whether or not it is
possible for machinery to show intelligent behaviour". He devised the
Turing test, which measures the ability of a machine to simulate human
conversation.[194] Since we can only observe the behavior of the
machine, it does not matter if it is "actually" thinking or literally
has a "mind". Turing notes that [we can not determine these things about
other people](Problem_of_other_minds "wikilink") but "it is usual to
have a polite convention that everyone thinks"

[Russell](Stuart_J._Russell "wikilink") and
[Norvig](Peter_Norvig "wikilink") agree with Turing that intelligence
must be defined in terms of external behavior, not internal structure.
However, they are critical that the test requires the machine to imitate
humans. "[Aeronautical engineering](Aeronautics "wikilink") texts," they
wrote, "do not define the goal of their field as making 'machines that
fly so exactly like [pigeons](pigeon "wikilink") that they can fool
other pigeons.{{' "}} AI founder [John
McCarthy](John_McCarthy_(computer_scientist) "wikilink") agreed, writing
that "Artificial intelligence is not, by definition, simulation of human
intelligence".

McCarthy defines intelligence as "the computational part of the ability
to achieve goals in the world". Another AI founder, [Marvin
Minsky](Marvin_Minsky "wikilink") similarly describes it as "the ability
to solve hard problems". The leading AI textbook defines it as the study
of agents that perceive their environment and take actions that maximize
their chances of achieving defined goals. These definitions view
intelligence in terms of well-defined problems with well-defined
solutions, where both the difficulty of the problem and the performance
of the program are direct measures of the "intelligence" of the
machine—and no other philosophical discussion is required, or may not
even be possible.

Another definition has been adopted by Google,[195] a major practitioner
in the field of AI. This definition stipulates the ability of systems to
synthesize information as the manifestation of intelligence, similar to
the way it is defined in biological intelligence.

### Evaluating approaches to AI

No established unifying theory or [paradigm](paradigm "wikilink") has
guided AI research for most of its history. The unprecedented success of
statistical machine learning in the 2010s eclipsed all other approaches
(so much so that some sources, especially in the business world, use the
term "artificial intelligence" to mean "machine learning with neural
networks"). This approach is mostly
[sub-symbolic](sub-symbolic "wikilink"),
[soft](soft_computing "wikilink") and
[narrow](artificial_general_intelligence "wikilink"). Critics argue that
these questions may have to be revisited by future generations of AI
researchers.

#### Symbolic AI and its limits

[Symbolic AI](Symbolic_artificial_intelligence "wikilink") (or
"[GOFAI](GOFAI "wikilink")") simulated the high-level conscious
reasoning that people use when they solve puzzles, express legal
reasoning and do mathematics. They were highly successful at
"intelligent" tasks such as algebra or IQ tests. In the 1960s, Newell
and Simon proposed the [physical symbol systems
hypothesis](physical_symbol_systems_hypothesis "wikilink"): "A physical
symbol system has the necessary and sufficient means of general
intelligent action."[196]

However, the symbolic approach failed on many tasks that humans solve
easily, such as learning, recognizing an object or commonsense
reasoning. [Moravec's paradox](Moravec's_paradox "wikilink") is the
discovery that high-level "intelligent" tasks were easy for AI, but low
level "instinctive" tasks were extremely difficult.[197] Philosopher
[Hubert Dreyfus](Hubert_Dreyfus "wikilink") had
[argued](Dreyfus'_critique_of_AI "wikilink") since the 1960s that human
expertise depends on unconscious instinct rather than conscious symbol
manipulation, and on having a "feel" for the situation, rather than
explicit symbolic knowledge.[198] Although his arguments had been
ridiculed and ignored when they were first presented, eventually, AI
research came to agree with him.[199]

The issue is not resolved: [sub-symbolic](sub-symbolic "wikilink")
reasoning can make many of the same inscrutable mistakes that human
intuition does, such as [algorithmic bias](algorithmic_bias "wikilink").
Critics such as [Noam Chomsky](Noam_Chomsky "wikilink") argue continuing
research into symbolic AI will still be necessary to attain general
intelligence, in part because sub-symbolic AI is a move away from
[explainable AI](explainable_AI "wikilink"): it can be difficult or
impossible to understand why a modern statistical AI program made a
particular decision. The emerging field of [neuro-symbolic artificial
intelligence](Neuro-symbolic_AI "wikilink") attempts to bridge the two
approaches.

#### Neat vs. scruffy

"Neats" hope that intelligent behavior is described using simple,
elegant principles (such as [logic](logic "wikilink"),
[optimization](optimization_(mathematics) "wikilink"), or [neural
networks](Artificial_neural_network "wikilink")). "Scruffies" expect
that it necessarily requires solving a large number of unrelated
problems. Neats defend their programs with theoretical rigor, scruffies
rely mainly on incremental testing to see if they work. This issue was
actively discussed in the 1970s and 1980s,[200] but eventually was seen
as irrelevant. Modern AI has elements of both.

#### Soft vs. hard computing

Finding a provably correct or optimal solution is
[intractable](Intractability_(complexity) "wikilink") for many important
problems.[201] Soft computing is a set of techniques, including [genetic
algorithms](genetic_algorithms "wikilink"), [fuzzy
logic](fuzzy_logic "wikilink") and neural networks, that are tolerant of
imprecision, uncertainty, partial truth and approximation. Soft
computing was introduced in the late 1980s and most successful AI
programs in the 21st century are examples of soft computing with neural
networks.

#### Narrow vs. general AI

AI researchers are divided as to whether to pursue the goals of
artificial general intelligence and
[superintelligence](superintelligence "wikilink") directly or to solve
as many specific problems as possible (narrow AI) in hopes these
solutions will lead indirectly to the field's long-term goals. General
intelligence is difficult to define and difficult to measure, and modern
AI has had more verifiable successes by focusing on specific problems
with specific solutions. The experimental sub-field of artificial
general intelligence studies this area exclusively.

### Machine consciousness, sentience, and mind

The [philosophy of mind](philosophy_of_mind "wikilink") does not know
whether a machine can have a [mind](mind "wikilink"),
[consciousness](consciousness "wikilink") and [mental
states](philosophy_of_mind "wikilink"), in the same sense that human
beings do. This issue considers the internal experiences of the machine,
rather than its external behavior. Mainstream AI research considers this
issue irrelevant because it does not affect the goals of the field: to
build machines that can solve problems using intelligence.
[Russell](Stuart_J._Russell "wikilink") and
[Norvig](Peter_Norvig "wikilink") add that "\[t\]he additional project
of making a machine conscious in exactly the way humans are is not one
that we are equipped to take on." However, the question has become
central to the philosophy of mind. It is also typically the central
question at issue in [artificial intelligence in
fiction](artificial_intelligence_in_fiction "wikilink").

#### Consciousness

[David Chalmers](David_Chalmers "wikilink") identified two problems in
understanding the mind, which he named the "hard" and "easy" problems of
consciousness. The easy problem is understanding how the brain processes
signals, makes plans and controls behavior. The hard problem is
explaining how this *feels* or why it should feel like anything at all,
assuming we are right in thinking that it truly does feel like something
(Dennett's consciousness illusionism says this is an illusion). While
human [information
processing](Information_processing_(psychology) "wikilink") is easy to
explain, human [subjective experience](subjective_experience "wikilink")
is difficult to explain. For example, it is easy to imagine a
color-blind person who has learned to identify which objects in their
field of view are red, but it is not clear what would be required for
the person to *know what red looks like*.

#### Computationalism and functionalism

Computationalism is the position in the [philosophy of
mind](philosophy_of_mind "wikilink") that the human mind is an
information processing system and that thinking is a form of computing.
Computationalism argues that the relationship between mind and body is
similar or identical to the relationship between software and hardware
and thus may be a solution to the [mind–body
problem](mind–body_problem "wikilink"). This philosophical position was
inspired by the work of AI researchers and cognitive scientists in the
1960s and was originally proposed by philosophers [Jerry
Fodor](Jerry_Fodor "wikilink") and [Hilary
Putnam](Hilary_Putnam "wikilink").

Philosopher [John Searle](John_Searle "wikilink") characterized this
position as "[strong AI](Strong_AI_hypothesis "wikilink")": "The
appropriately programmed computer with the right inputs and outputs
would thereby have a mind in exactly the same sense human beings have
minds." Searle counters this assertion with his Chinese room argument,
which attempts to show that, even if a machine perfectly simulates human
behavior, there is still no reason to suppose it also has a mind.[202]

#### AI welfare and rights

It is difficult or impossible to reliably evaluate whether an advanced
[AI is sentient](Sentient_AI "wikilink") (has the ability to feel), and
if so, to what degree.[203] But if there is a significant chance that a
given machine can feel and suffer, then it may be entitled to certain
rights or welfare protection measures, similarly to animals.[204][205]
[Sapience](Sapience "wikilink") (a set of capacities related to high
intelligence, such as discernment or
[self-awareness](self-awareness "wikilink")) may provide another moral
basis for AI rights.[206] [Robot rights](Robot_rights "wikilink") are
also sometimes proposed as a practical way to integrate autonomous
agents into society.[207]

In 2017, the European Union considered granting "electronic personhood"
to some of the most capable AI systems. Similarly to the legal status of
companies, it would have conferred rights but also
responsibilities.[208] Critics argued in 2018 that granting rights to AI
systems would downplay the importance of [human
rights](human_rights "wikilink"), and that legislation should focus on
user needs rather than speculative futuristic scenarios. They also noted
that robots lacked the autonomy to take part to society on their
own.[209][210]

Progress in AI increased interest in the topic. Proponents of AI welfare
and rights often argue that AI sentience, if it emerges, would be
particularly easy to deny. They warn that this may be a [moral blind
spot](Moral_blindness "wikilink") analogous to
[slavery](slavery "wikilink") or [factory
farming](factory_farming "wikilink"), which could lead to [large-scale
suffering](Suffering_risks "wikilink") if sentient AI is created and
carelessly exploited.[211][212]

## Future

### Superintelligence and the singularity

A [superintelligence](superintelligence "wikilink") is a hypothetical
agent that would possess intelligence far surpassing that of the
brightest and most gifted human mind.

If research into [artificial general
intelligence](artificial_general_intelligence "wikilink") produced
sufficiently intelligent software, it might be able to [reprogram and
improve itself](Recursive_self-improvement "wikilink"). The improved
software would be even better at improving itself, leading to what [I.
J. Good](I._J._Good "wikilink") called an "[intelligence
explosion](intelligence_explosion "wikilink")" and [Vernor
Vinge](Vernor_Vinge "wikilink") called a
"[singularity](Technological_singularity "wikilink")".[213]

However, technologies cannot improve exponentially indefinitely, and
typically follow an [S-shaped curve](S-shaped_curve "wikilink"), slowing
when they reach the physical limits of what the technology can do.

### Transhumanism

Robot designer [Hans Moravec](Hans_Moravec "wikilink"), cyberneticist
[Kevin Warwick](Kevin_Warwick "wikilink"), and inventor [Ray
Kurzweil](Ray_Kurzweil "wikilink") have predicted that humans and
machines will merge in the future into [cyborgs](cyborg "wikilink") that
are more capable and powerful than either. This idea, called
transhumanism, has roots in [Aldous Huxley](Aldous_Huxley "wikilink")
and [Robert Ettinger](Robert_Ettinger "wikilink").[214]

[Edward Fredkin](Edward_Fredkin "wikilink") argues that "artificial
intelligence is the next stage in evolution", an idea first proposed by
[Samuel Butler](Samuel_Butler_(novelist) "wikilink")'s "[Darwin among
the Machines](Darwin_among_the_Machines "wikilink")" as far back as
1863, and expanded upon by [George
Dyson](George_Dyson_(science_historian) "wikilink") in his book of the
same name in 1998.[215]

## In fiction

[thumb|upright=1.2|The word "robot" itself was coined by [Karel
Čapek](Karel_Čapek "wikilink") in his 1921 play
*[R.U.R.](R.U.R. "wikilink")*, the title standing for "Rossum's
Universal Robots".](File:Capek_play.jpg "wikilink")

Thought-capable artificial beings have appeared as storytelling devices
since antiquity,[216] and have been a persistent theme in [science
fiction](science_fiction "wikilink").

A common [trope](Trope_(literature) "wikilink") in these works began
with [Mary Shelley](Mary_Shelley "wikilink")'s
*[Frankenstein](Frankenstein "wikilink")*, where a human creation
becomes a threat to its masters. This includes such works as [Arthur C.
Clarke's](2001:_A_Space_Odyssey_(novel) "wikilink") and [Stanley
Kubrick's](2001:_A_Space_Odyssey_(film) "wikilink") *2001: A Space
Odyssey* (both 1968), with [HAL 9000](HAL_9000 "wikilink"), the
murderous computer in charge of the *[Discovery
One](Discovery_One "wikilink")* spaceship, as well as *[The
Terminator](The_Terminator "wikilink")* (1984) and *[The
Matrix](The_Matrix "wikilink")* (1999). In contrast, the rare loyal
robots such as Gort from *[The Day the Earth Stood
Still](The_Day_the_Earth_Stood_Still "wikilink")* (1951) and Bishop from
*[Aliens](Aliens_(film) "wikilink")* (1986) are less prominent in
popular culture.

[Isaac Asimov](Isaac_Asimov "wikilink") introduced the [Three Laws of
Robotics](Three_Laws_of_Robotics "wikilink") in many books and stories,
most notably the "Multivac" series about a super-intelligent computer of
the same name. Asimov's laws are often brought up during lay discussions
of machine ethics; while almost all artificial intelligence researchers
are familiar with Asimov's laws through popular culture, they generally
consider the laws useless for many reasons, one of which is their
ambiguity.

Several works use AI to force us to confront the fundamental question of
what makes us human, showing us artificial beings that have [the ability
to feel](sentience "wikilink"), and thus to suffer. This appears in
[Karel Čapek](Karel_Čapek "wikilink")'s *[R.U.R.](R.U.R. "wikilink")*,
the films *[A.I. Artificial
Intelligence](A.I._Artificial_Intelligence "wikilink")* and *[Ex
Machina](Ex_Machina_(film) "wikilink")*, as well as the novel *[Do
Androids Dream of Electric
Sheep?](Do_Androids_Dream_of_Electric_Sheep? "wikilink")*, by [Philip K.
Dick](Philip_K._Dick "wikilink"). Dick considers the idea that our
understanding of human subjectivity is altered by technology created
with artificial intelligence.

## See also

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

## Explanatory notes

## References

### AI textbooks

The two most widely used textbooks in 2023. (See the [Open
Syllabus](https://explorer.opensyllabus.org/result/field?id=Computer+Science)).

-   

-   

These were the four of the most widely used AI textbooks in 2008:

-   

-   

-   .

-   

Later editions.

-   

### History of AI

-   .

-   .

-   

### Other sources

-   [AI & ML in
    Fusion](https://suli.pppl.gov/2023/course/Rea-PPPL-SULI2023.pdf)

-   [AI & ML in Fusion, video
    lecture](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1npCTrJ8XJn20ZGDA_DfMpANuQZFMzKPh/view?usp=drive_link)

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   Presidential Address to the [Association for the Advancement of
    Artificial
    Intelligence](Association_for_the_Advancement_of_Artificial_Intelligence "wikilink").

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   Later published as  

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

## Further reading

-   Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar et al. "Attention is all
    you need." Advances in neural information processing systems 30
    (2017). Seminal paper on
    [transformers](transformer_(machine_learning_model) "wikilink").

-   [Autor, David H.](David_Autor "wikilink"), "Why Are There Still So
    Many Jobs? The History and Future of Workplace Automation" (2015)
    29(3) *Journal of Economic Perspectives* 3.

-   [Boden, Margaret](Margaret_Boden "wikilink"), *Mind As Machine*,
    [Oxford University Press](Oxford_University_Press "wikilink"), 2006.

-   [Cukier, Kenneth](Kenneth_Cukier "wikilink"), "Ready for Robots? How
    to Think about the Future of AI", *[Foreign
    Affairs](Foreign_Affairs "wikilink")*, vol. 98, no. 4 (July/August
    2019), pp. 192–98. [George
    Dyson](George_Dyson_(science_historian) "wikilink"), historian of
    computing, writes (in what might be called "Dyson's Law") that "Any
    system simple enough to be understandable will not be complicated
    enough to behave intelligently, while any system complicated enough
    to behave intelligently will be too complicated to understand."
    (p. 197.) Computer scientist [Alex
    Pentland](Alex_Pentland "wikilink") writes: "Current [AI
    machine-learning](machine_learning "wikilink")
    [algorithms](algorithm "wikilink") are, at their core, dead simple
    stupid. They work, but they work by brute force." (p. 198.)

-   Gertner, Jon. (2023) "Wikipedia's Moment of Truth: Can the online
    encyclopedia help teach A.I. chatbots to get their facts right —
    without destroying itself in the process?" *New York Times Magazine*
    (July 18, 2023)
    [online](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/07/18/magazine/wikipedia-ai-chatgpt.html)

-   [Gleick, James](James_Gleick "wikilink"), "The Fate of Free Will"
    (review of [Kevin J. Mitchell](Kevin_J._Mitchell "wikilink"), *Free
    Agents: How Evolution Gave Us Free Will*, Princeton University
    Press, 2023, 333 pp.), *[The New York Review of
    Books](The_New_York_Review_of_Books "wikilink")*, vol. LXXI, no. 1
    (18 January 2024), pp. 27–28, 30.
    "[Agency](Agency_(philosophy) "wikilink") is what distinguishes us
    from machines. For biological creatures, [reason](reason "wikilink")
    and [purpose](motivation "wikilink") come from acting in the world
    and experiencing the consequences. Artificial intelligences –
    disembodied, strangers to blood, sweat, and tears – have no occasion
    for that." (p. 30.)

-   [Hughes-Castleberry, Kenna](Kenna_Hughes-Castleberry "wikilink"), "A
    Murder Mystery Puzzle: The literary puzzle *[Cain's
    Jawbone](Cain's_Jawbone "wikilink")*, which has stumped humans for
    decades, reveals the limitations of natural-language-processing
    algorithms", *[Scientific
    American](Scientific_American "wikilink")*, vol. 329, no. 4
    (November 2023), pp. 81–82. "This murder mystery competition has
    revealed that although NLP ([natural-language
    processing](natural-language_processing "wikilink")) models are
    capable of incredible feats, their abilities are very much limited
    by the amount of [context](context_(linguistics) "wikilink") they
    receive. This \[...\] could cause \[difficulties\] for researchers
    who hope to use them to do things such as analyze [ancient
    languages](ancient_language "wikilink"). In some cases, there are
    few historical records on long-gone
    [civilizations](civilization "wikilink") to serve as [training
    data](training_data "wikilink") for such a purpose." (p. 82.)

-   [Immerwahr, Daniel](Daniel_Immerwahr "wikilink"), "Your Lying Eyes:
    People now use A.I. to generate fake videos indistinguishable from
    real ones. How much does it matter?", *[The New
    Yorker](The_New_Yorker "wikilink")*, 20 November 2023, pp. 54–59.
    "If by '[deepfakes](deepfakes "wikilink")' we mean realistic videos
    produced using artificial intelligence that actually deceive people,
    then they barely exist. The fakes aren't deep, and the deeps aren't
    fake. \[...\] A.I.-generated videos are not, in general, operating
    in our media as counterfeited evidence. Their role better resembles
    that of [cartoons](cartoon "wikilink"), especially smutty ones."
    (p. 59.)

-   Johnston, John (2008) *The Allure of Machinic Life: Cybernetics,
    Artificial Life, and the New AI*, MIT Press.

-   

-   

-   [Marcus, Gary](Gary_Marcus "wikilink"), "Artificial Confidence: Even
    the newest, buzziest systems of artificial general intelligence are
    stymmied by the same old problems", *[Scientific
    American](Scientific_American "wikilink")*, vol. 327, no. 4 (October
    2022), pp. 42–45.

-   

-   Introduced [DQN](Deep_Q-learning "wikilink"), which produced
    human-level performance on some Atari games.

-   [Press, Eyal](Eyal_Press "wikilink"), "In Front of Their Faces: Does
    facial-recognition technology lead police to ignore contradictory
    evidence?", *[The New Yorker](The_New_Yorker "wikilink")*, 20
    November 2023, pp. 20–26.

-   [Roivainen, Eka](Eka_Roivainen "wikilink"), "AI's IQ:
    [ChatGPT](ChatGPT "wikilink") aced a \[standard intelligence\] test
    but showed that [intelligence](intelligence "wikilink") cannot be
    measured by [IQ](IQ "wikilink") alone", *[Scientific
    American](Scientific_American "wikilink")*, vol. 329, no. 1
    (July/August 2023), p. 7. "Despite its high IQ,
    [ChatGPT](ChatGPT "wikilink") fails at tasks that require real
    humanlike reasoning or an understanding of the physical and social
    world.... ChatGPT seemed unable to reason logically and tried to
    rely on its vast database of... facts derived from online texts."

-   Scharre, Paul, "Killer Apps: The Real Dangers of an AI Arms Race",
    *[Foreign Affairs](Foreign_Affairs "wikilink")*, vol. 98, no. 3
    (May/June 2019), pp. 135–44. "Today's AI technologies are powerful
    but unreliable. Rules-based systems cannot deal with circumstances
    their programmers did not anticipate. Learning systems are limited
    by the data on which they were trained. AI failures have already led
    to tragedy. Advanced autopilot features in cars, although they
    perform well in some circumstances, have driven cars without warning
    into trucks, concrete barriers, and parked cars. In the wrong
    situation, AI systems go from supersmart to superdumb in an instant.
    When an enemy is trying to manipulate and hack an AI system, the
    risks are even greater." (p. 140.)

-   

-   

-   

## External links

-   

-   

-   [Artificial
    Intelligence](https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p003k9fc). BBC Radio
    4 discussion with John Agar, Alison Adam & Igor Aleksander (*In Our
    Time*, 8 December 2005).

-   [Theranostics and AI – The Next Advance in Cancer Precision
    Medicine](https://datascience.cancer.gov/news-events/blog/theranostics-and-ai-next-advance-cancer-precision-medicine)

[Category:Artificial
intelligence](Category:Artificial_intelligence "wikilink")
[Category:Computational fields of
study](Category:Computational_fields_of_study "wikilink")
[Category:Computational
neuroscience](Category:Computational_neuroscience "wikilink")
[Category:Cybernetics](Category:Cybernetics "wikilink") [Category:Data
science](Category:Data_science "wikilink") [Category:Formal
sciences](Category:Formal_sciences "wikilink") [Category:Intelligence by
type](Category:Intelligence_by_type "wikilink")

[1] [AI set to exceed human brain
power](http://www.cnn.com/2006/TECH/science/07/24/ai.bostrom/) CNN.com
(July 26, 2006)

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]
.

[12] Problem-solving, puzzle solving, game playing, and deduction:

-   

-   ([constraint satisfaction](constraint_satisfaction "wikilink"))

-   

-   

-   

[13] Uncertain reasoning:

-   

-   

-   

-   

[14] [Intractability and efficiency](Intractably "wikilink") and the
[combinatorial explosion](combinatorial_explosion "wikilink"):

-   

[15] Psychological evidence of the prevalence of sub-symbolic reasoning
and knowledge:

-   

-   

-   

-   

[16] [Knowledge representation](Knowledge_representation "wikilink") and
[knowledge engineering](knowledge_engineering "wikilink"):

-   

-   

-   ,

-   

[17] Representing categories and relations: [Semantic
networks](Semantic_network "wikilink"), [description
logics](description_logic "wikilink"),
[inheritance](Inheritance_(object-oriented_programming) "wikilink")
(including [frames](Frame_(artificial_intelligence) "wikilink"), and
[scripts](Scripts_(artificial_intelligence) "wikilink")):

-   ,

-   ,

-   ,

-   

[18] Representing events and time:[Situation
calculus](Situation_calculus "wikilink"), [event
calculus](event_calculus "wikilink"), [fluent
calculus](fluent_calculus "wikilink") (including solving the [frame
problem](frame_problem "wikilink")):

-   ,

-   ,

-   

[19] [Causal calculus](Causality#Causal_calculus "wikilink"):

-   

[20] Representing knowledge about knowledge: Belief calculus, [modal
logics](modal_logic "wikilink"):

-   ,

-   

[21] [Default reasoning](Default_reasoning "wikilink"), [Frame
problem](Frame_problem "wikilink"), [default
logic](default_logic "wikilink"), [non-monotonic
logics](non-monotonic_logic "wikilink"),
[circumscription](circumscription_(logic) "wikilink"), [closed world
assumption](closed_world_assumption "wikilink"),
[abduction](abductive_reasoning "wikilink"):

-   

-   

-   

-   

(Poole *et al.* places abduction under "default reasoning". Luger *et
al.* places this under "uncertain reasoning").

[22] Breadth of commonsense knowledge:

-   

-   ,

-   ,

-   ([qualification problem](qualification_problem "wikilink"))

[23]

[24] [Automated planning](Automated_planning_and_scheduling "wikilink"):

-   .

[25] [Automated decision making](Automated_decision_making "wikilink"),
[Decision theory](Decision_theory "wikilink"):

-   .

[26] [Classical
planning](Automated_planning_and_scheduling#classical_planning "wikilink"):

-   .

[27] Sensorless or "conformant" planning, contingent planning,
replanning (a.k.a online planning):

-   .

[28] Uncertain preferences:

-   

[Inverse reinforcement
learning](Inverse_reinforcement_learning "wikilink"):

-   

[29] [Information value theory](Information_value_theory "wikilink"):

-   .

[30] [Markov decision process](Markov_decision_process "wikilink"):

-   .

[31] [Game theory](Game_theory "wikilink") and multi-agent decision
theory:

-   .

[32] [Learning](machine_learning "wikilink"):

-   

-   

-   

-   

[33] [Unsupervised learning](Unsupervised_learning "wikilink"):

-   (definition)

-   ([cluster analysis](cluster_analysis "wikilink"))

-   ([word embedding](word_embedding "wikilink"))

[34] [Supervised learning](Supervised_learning "wikilink"):

-   (Definition)

-   (Techniques)

[35] [Reinforcement learning](Reinforcement_learning "wikilink"):

-   

-   

[36] [Transfer learning](Transfer_learning "wikilink"):

-   

-   

[37]
Built In |url=<https://builtin.com/artificial-intelligence>
|access-date=2023-10-30 |website=builtin.com}}

[38] [Computational learning
theory](Computational_learning_theory "wikilink"):

-   

-   

[39] [Natural language
processing](Natural_language_processing "wikilink") (NLP):

-   

-   

-   

[40] Subproblems of [NLP](Natural_language_processing "wikilink"):

-   

[41]

[42] Modern statistical and deep learning approaches to
[NLP](Natural_language_processing "wikilink"):

-   

-   

[43] [Computer vision](Computer_vision "wikilink"):

-   

-   

[44] [Affective computing](Affective_computing "wikilink"):

-   

-   

-   

-   

[45] [Artificial general
intelligence](Artificial_general_intelligence "wikilink"):

-   

Proposal for the modern version:

-   

Warnings of overspecialization in AI from leading researchers:

-   

-   

-   

[46] [Search algorithms](Search_algorithm "wikilink"):

-   

-   

-   

-   

[47] [State space search](State_space_search "wikilink"):

-   

[48] [Uninformed searches](Uninformed_search "wikilink") ([breadth first
search](breadth_first_search "wikilink"), [depth-first
search](depth-first_search "wikilink") and general [state space
search](state_space_search "wikilink")):

-   

-   

-   

-   

[49]

[50] [Heuristic](Heuristic "wikilink") or informed searches (e.g.,
greedy [best first](Best-first_search "wikilink") and
[A\*](A*_search_algorithm "wikilink")):

-   

-   

-   

-   

[51] [Adversarial search](Adversarial_search "wikilink"):

-   

[52]

[53] [Evolutionary computation](Evolutionary_computation "wikilink"):

-   

[54] [Logic](Logic "wikilink"):

-   

-   

-   

[55] [Propositional logic](Propositional_logic "wikilink"):

-   

-   

-   </ref>

    and [predicate logic](predicate_logic "wikilink") (which also
    operates on objects, predicates and relations and uses
    [quantifiers](Quantifier_(logic) "wikilink") such as "*Every* *X* is
    a *Y*" and "There are *some* *X*s that are
    *Y*s").<ref name="Predicate logic">

[First-order logic](First-order_logic "wikilink") and features such as
[equality](Equality_(mathematics) "wikilink"):

-   

-   ,

-   ,

-   

[56] [Logical inference](Logical_inference "wikilink"):

-   

[57] logical deduction as search:

-   

-   

-   

-   

[58] [Resolution](Resolution_(logic) "wikilink") and
[unification](unification_(computer_science) "wikilink"):

-   

[59]

[60] Fuzzy logic:

-   

-   

[61]

[62] Stochastic methods for uncertain reasoning:

-   ,

-   ,

-   ,

-   

[63] [decision theory](decision_theory "wikilink") and [decision
analysis](decision_analysis "wikilink"):

-   ,

-   

[64] [Information value theory](Information_value_theory "wikilink"):

-   

[65] [Markov decision processes](Markov_decision_process "wikilink") and
dynamic [decision networks](Decision_network "wikilink"):

-   

[66]

[67] [Game theory](Game_theory "wikilink") and [mechanism
design](mechanism_design "wikilink"):

-   

[68] [Bayesian networks](Bayesian_network "wikilink"):

-   ,

-   ,

-   ,

-   

[69] [Bayesian inference](Bayesian_inference "wikilink") algorithm:

-   ,

-   ,

-   ,

-   

[70] [Bayesian learning](Bayesian_learning "wikilink") and the
[expectation–maximization
algorithm](expectation–maximization_algorithm "wikilink"):

-   ,

-   ,

-   

-   

[71] [Bayesian decision theory](Bayesian_decision_theory "wikilink") and
Bayesian [decision networks](decision_network "wikilink"):

-   

[72]

[73] Stochastic temporal models:

-   

[Hidden Markov model](Hidden_Markov_model "wikilink"):

-   

[Kalman filters](Kalman_filter "wikilink"):

-   

[Dynamic Bayesian networks](Dynamic_Bayesian_network "wikilink"):

-   

[74] Statistical learning methods and
[classifiers](Classifier_(mathematics) "wikilink"):

-   ,

[75]

[76] [Decision trees](Alternating_decision_tree "wikilink"):

-   

-   

[77] [Non-parameteric](Nonparametric_statistics "wikilink") learning
models such as [K-nearest neighbor](K-nearest_neighbor "wikilink") and
[support vector machines](support_vector_machines "wikilink"):

-   

-   (k-nearest neighbor)

-   (kernel methods)

[78] [Naive Bayes classifier](Naive_Bayes_classifier "wikilink"):

-   

-   

[79]

[80] Neural networks:

-   ,

-   

[81] Gradient calculation in computational graphs,
[backpropagation](backpropagation "wikilink"), [automatic
differentiation](automatic_differentiation "wikilink"):

-   ,

-   ,

-   

[82] [Universal approximation
theorem](Universal_approximation_theorem "wikilink"):

-   

The theorem:

-   

-   

[83] [Feedforward neural
networks](Feedforward_neural_network "wikilink"):

-   

[84] [Recurrent neural networks](Recurrent_neural_network "wikilink"):

-   

[85] [Perceptrons](Perceptron "wikilink"):

-   

[86]

[87] [Convolutional neural
networks](Convolutional_neural_networks "wikilink"):

-   

[88] [Deep learning](Deep_learning "wikilink"):

-   

-   

-   

-   

[89]

[90]

[91]

[92]

[93]

[94]

[95]

[96]

[97]

[98]

[99]

[100]

[101]

[102]

[103]

[104]

[105]

[106]

[107]

[108] Matthew Finio & Amanda Downie: IBM Think 2024 Primer, "What is
Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Finance?" 8 Dec. 2023

[109] M. Nicolas J. Firzli: Pensions Age/European Pensions magazine,
"Artificial Intelligence: Ask the Industry" May June 2024
<https://videovoice.org/ai-in-finance-innovation-entrepreneurship-vs-over-regulation-with-the-eus-artificial-intelligence-act-wont-work-as-intended/>

[110]
[PD-notice](Template:PD-notice "wikilink")

[111]

[112]

[113]

[114]

[115]

[116]

[117]

[118]

[119]

[120]

[121]

[122]

[123]

[124]
; ; ;

[125] [Algorithmic bias](Algorithmic_bias "wikilink") and [Fairness
(machine learning)](Fairness_(machine_learning) "wikilink"):

-   

-   

[126]
;

[127]
; ; ;

[128] Quoted in .

[129]
;

[130]

[131]
;

[132]
;

[133]

[134]

[135]

[136] E McGaughey, 'Will Robots Automate Your Job Away? Full Employment,
Basic Income, and Economic Democracy' (2022) [51(3) Industrial Law
Journal 511–559](https://academic.oup.com/ilj/article/51/3/511/6321008)

[137]
;

[138]
; ;

[139]

[140]

[141]

[142]
;

[143]

[144]
; ; .

[145] Leaders' concerns about the existential risks of AI around 2015:

-   

-   

-   

-   

[146]

[147]

[148]

[149]

[150]

[151] Arguments that AI is not an imminent risk:

-   

-   

-   

-   

[152]

[153]

[154]

[155]

[156]

[157]

[158]

[159]

[160]

[161]

[162]

[163]

[164]

[165] Regulation of AI to mitigate risks:

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

[166]

[167]

[168]

[169]

[170]

[171]

[172]

[173] AI's immediate precursors:

-   

-   

-   

-   

[174]

[175]

[176] [Dartmouth workshop](Dartmouth_workshop "wikilink"):

-   

-   

-   

The proposal:

-   

[177] Successful programs the 1960s:

-   

-   

-   

-   

[178]

[179]
quoted in

[180]
quoted in

[181] First [AI Winter](AI_Winter "wikilink"), [Lighthill
report](Lighthill_report "wikilink"), [Mansfield
Amendment](Mansfield_Amendment "wikilink")

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

[182] [Expert systems](Expert_systems "wikilink"):

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

[183] Funding initiatives in the early 1980s: [Fifth Generation
Project](Fifth_Generation_Project "wikilink") (Japan),
[Alvey](Alvey "wikilink") (UK), [Microelectronics and Computer
Technology
Corporation](Microelectronics_and_Computer_Technology_Corporation "wikilink")
(US), [Strategic Computing
Initiative](Strategic_Computing_Initiative "wikilink") (US):

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

[184] Second [AI Winter](AI_Winter "wikilink"):

-   

-   

-   

-   

-   

[185]

[186]
-   

-   

[187] [Formal](#Neat_vs._scruffy "wikilink") and
[narrow](#Narrow_vs._general_AI "wikilink") methods adopted in the
1990s:

-   

-   

[188] AI widely used in the late 1990s:

-   

-   

-   

[189]

[190] [Deep learning](Deep_learning "wikilink") revolution,
[AlexNet](AlexNet "wikilink"):

-   

-   

-   

[191] [Moore's Law](Moore's_Law "wikilink") and AI:

-   

[192] [Big data](Big_data "wikilink"):

-   

[193]

[194] Turing's original publication of the [Turing
test](Turing_test "wikilink") in "[Computing machinery and
intelligence](Computing_machinery_and_intelligence "wikilink")":

-   

Historical influence and philosophical implications:

-   

-   

-   

-   

[195]

[196] Physical symbol system hypothesis:

-   

Historical significance:

-   

-   

[197] [Moravec's paradox](Moravec's_paradox "wikilink"):

-   

-   

-   

[198] [Dreyfus' critique of AI](Dreyfus'_critique_of_AI "wikilink"):

-   

-   

Historical significance and philosophical implications:

-   

-   

-   

-   

[199]

[200] [Neats vs. scruffies](Neats_vs._scruffies "wikilink"), the
historic debate:

-   

-   

-   

-   

A classic example of the "scruffy" approach to intelligence:

-   

A modern example of neat AI and its aspirations in the 21st century:

-   

[201]

[202] Searle's [Chinese room](Chinese_room "wikilink") argument:

-   . Searle's original presentation of the thought experiment.

-   .

Discussion:

-   

-   

-   

[203]

[204]

[205]

[206]

[207]

[208]

[209]

[210]

[211]

[212]

[213] The [Intelligence explosion](Intelligence_explosion "wikilink")
and [technological singularity](technological_singularity "wikilink"):

-   

-   

-   

[I. J. Good](I._J._Good "wikilink")'s "intelligence explosion"

-   

[Vernor Vinge](Vernor_Vinge "wikilink")'s "singularity"

-   

[214] [Transhumanism](Transhumanism "wikilink"):

-   

-   

-   

[215] AI as evolution:

-   [Edward Fredkin](Edward_Fredkin "wikilink") is quoted in

-   

-   

[216] AI in myth:

-   
